3

Chapter 1
General aspects of introduction to 
diseases, diagnosis, and management 
of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
Since the beginning of human civilization, cats and dogs have 
been companions to people as per the references in the ancient 
scriptures and the Vedas. Animal illness is an alteration to an ani-
mal’s normal state that affects or disrupts vital functioning. Since 
the very first interactions between humans and animals, there has 
been a concern with animal ailments, which is mirrored in early 
conceptions of religion and magic. Animal diseases continue to 
be a problem, mostly because of the financial harm they may do 
and the possibility that they could spread to people or animals. 
The disease can be described as a harmful divergence from an 
organism’s normal physiological condition that is significant 
enough to result in overt signs or symptoms. The deviation may 
be a functional problem with hidden organic changes, or it may 
be an evident organic change in the tissue making up an organ. 
The degree of the alterations that take place in cells and tissues 
exposed to harmful chemicals depends on the sensitivity of the 
tissue in question as well as the type and duration of the agent.
Treatment of dog and cats, that is suspected of having a dis-
ease, includes a description of the animal (age, species, sex, and 
breed), the animal’s history, a description of the preliminary ex-
amination, clinical findings from a review of the body systems, 
results of particular laboratory tests, prognosis, case progress, 
termination, and, if necessary, the use of scientific references.
As it is evident that the veterinarian cannot question the 
animal, he must make a diagnosis of a disease based on a 
number of examinations and tests. Inspection, which involves 
a visual examination of the animal, palpation, which involves 
applying firm pressure with the fingers to tissues to assess 
characteristics like abnormal shapes and potential tumors, the 
presence of pain, and tissue consistency, percussion, which in-
volves applying a brief, sharp blow to tissue to elicit an audi-
ble response from body parts beneath, and auscultation, which 
entails listening for sounds that are abnormal or unusual, are 
all techniques used in the preparation of a diagnosis.
The first symptom of illness may be a raised temperature, 
or fever, brought on by the proliferation of disease-causing 
microbes. The body’s defenses against foreign invaders 
are activated by the rise in body temperature. Knowing the 
characteristics of the heartbeat and the circulatory system 
can be done by taking the pulse.
In addition to the tests already mentioned, the modern 
veterinary diagnostic laboratory also performs tests on bone 
marrow cells, specific organ functions (liver, kidney, pan -
creas, thyroid, adrenal, and pituitary glands, etc.), radioiso-
tope tests, tissue biopsies, and histochemical analyses, as 
well as tests on blood coagulation and body fluids.
Problems in dogs and cats are now often multifactorial 
in nature with nutritional, environmental, managemental, and 
genetic undercurrents. Many infectious diseases are ubiqui-
tous worldwide and airborne pathogens are difficult to con-
trol even after the adoption of very good preventive measures.
Vaccinations protect dogs and cats from some of the most 
serious diseases. Prevention through vaccination is essential 
since these diseases are difficult, if not treated. Vaccinations 
are the best gift you can give to your pet. All dogs and cats 
should be vaccinated; even indoor pets that never go outdoors. 
No vaccination confers lifetime immunity. However, a vaccine 
is effective in preventing the disease in people if it is adminis-
tered soon after their possible exposure. No diagnostic test is 
identified as the gold standard for diseases in dogs and cats.
2 Diagnosis and management of various 
diseases of dog and cat
2.1 General systemic condition
The general systemic condition can be defined as the general 
body condition of dogs or cats which are abnormal or not in 
a normal physiological limit. They contribute to the patho -
genesis of various diseases, either directly or indirectly, like

4 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
fever is recorded in the majority of infectious diseases. Some 
most important systemic body conditions are fever, hypother-
mia, hyperthermia, shock, heat stroke, toxemia, septicemia, 
stress, allergy (anaphylactic reaction), etc. The knowledge of 
these systemic states is prerequisite to understand better the 
pathophysiology of various systemic infections.
History, characteristic clinical findings like sudden 
onset, rise of body temperature, anorexia, dullness, de -
pression, lymphadenopathy specially splenomegaly, and 
marked change in total leucocyte count may play a role in 
the diagnosis of general systemic body condition.
In the case of hyperthermia plasma concentration of 
muscle enzymes, ALT, AST, LDH, and CPK are elevated 
due to muscle exertion.
The presence of petechial hemorrhage in mucosa and 
conjunctiva may suggest the occurrence of septicemia.
Changes in total and differential leukocyte number oc -
cur in endotoxemia. Leukocytosis and neutrophilia occur 
with mild endotoxemia.
A condition of stress can be directly detected by the as -
say of plasma ACTH and indirectly by cortisol. In chronic 
stress, there are marked lymphopenia, eosinopenia, and 
neutrophilia.
Clinically allergy is a state of recognizable hypersen -
sitivity. When there is exposure of an animal to antigen, in 
consequence of this, there is a state of increased reactivity 
of the animal and a specific immune response is achieved. 
Diagnosis of an anaphylactic reaction is based on the his -
tory of injecting foreign protein substance within the pre -
ceding hour, characteristic clinical signs, increased blood 
histamine level, and increased eosinophil count. Nowadays 
serological tests to detect the presence of antibodies to plant 
proteins in the diet have been used. Management of diseases 
is crucial for maximizing the quality of life of both affected 
dogs and cats for a long and pain-free life and to minimize 
genetic and lifestyle risk factors.
2.2 Diseases of cardiovascular system
The cardiovascular system is comprised of the heart, the 
veins, and the arteries. The atrioventricular and the semi -
lunar valves keep blood flowing in one direction through 
the heart. Valves in large veins keep blood flowing back 
toward the heart. Evaluation of the heart is performed via 
 assessment of heart sounds, murmurs, arterial pulses, elec -
trocardiography, radiography, etc.
There are various mechanisms that can result in differ -
ent abnormalities related to a cardiovascular system like a 
failure of closing and opening of cardiac valves, inadequate 
contraction and relaxation of heart muscles, irregularity in 
heartbeats, abnormal communication between chambers of 
the left side and right side of the heart, etc. These abnormal-
ities cause various diseases like valvular disease, myocar -
dial disease, arrhythmias, vascular disease, cardiac shunts, 
heart failure, congestive heart failure, failing heart, etc.
Most senior-aged small dogs have a heart murmur. Heart 
murmurs are a very common aging change that is most often re-
lated to mitral valve degeneration. A murmur can be diagnosed 
with a stethoscope by your veterinarian. Heart murmurs are 
often associated with and worsened by severe dental disease. 
Bacteria from the mouth enter the bloodstream and stick to the 
heart valves where it grows and causes the valves to malfunc-
tion. This is one reason why it is very important to have your 
pet’s teeth cleaned regularly to prevent plaque and tartar buildup 
as well as gum disease. This means that the valve separating the 
top and bottom chambers of the heart on the left side becomes 
diseased and does not close like it should normally. This allows 
for a backflow of blood into the upper chamber of the heart.
Electrocardiography of a dog suspected of cardiac problem.

Diseases, diagnosis, and management of dogs and cats  Chapter | 1  5
Degenerative valve disease is the most common heart 
disease in dogs and accounts for about 75% of cardiovas -
cular diseases in this species. This disease is characterized 
by thickening of the heart valves. It most commonly affects 
the mitral or tricuspid valve. The disease is age and breed 
related. In dogs, there are no signs during the early stages of 
the disease, although a heart murmur can be heard. Fainting 
may also occur due to decreased blood flow or arrhythmia. 
A veterinarian can often diagnose degenerative valve dis -
ease based on physical examination findings and appropri -
ate imaging procedures, which may include chest X-rays 
and echocardiography (ultrasonography). Because X-rays 
can be inconclusive, your veterinarian may recommend the 
pet owner to count the number of times their dog breathes 
within a minute while it sleeps. If your dog’s sleeping respi-
ratory rate is elevated, it may have abnormal fluid buildup 
within the lungs (pulmonary edema). Regular monitoring 
of the sleeping respiratory rate can also help assess your 
dog’s response to treatments. Arrhythmias may develop as 
the disease progresses and can be detected with electrocar -
diography. In addition, a blood test called an NT-proBNP 
may be helpful for diagnosis.
Diagnosis of cardiovascular disease is based on history, 
physical examination, i.e., inspection, auscultation and pal-
pation, cardiac biomarkers, radiography, electrocardiogra -
phy, and echocardiography.
In the case of infectious endocarditis, various blood 
samples may be needed for diagnosis and to monitor the 
effects of the infection. X-rays may show enlargement 
of a heart chamber or evidence of heart failure; however, 
echocardiography (ultrasonography) is the diagnostic test 
of choice for most veterinarians, because blood tests are 
positive in only 50%–90% of dogs. Electrocardiography 
(recording electrical activity of the heart) may show 
arrhythmias.
In the case of pericardial diseases, veterinarians may no-
tice a swollen jugular vein, muffled heart sounds, and pulse 
abnormalities during the examination of the dog. X-rays 
may show an enlarged or abnormally shaped heart. In most 
cases, an electrocardiogram is normal or just shows an in -
creased heart rate. The echocardiography (ultrasonography) 
examination is the most sensitive and specific test for the 
detection of cardiac tamponade. It may also reveal a tumor, 
if it is the cause of the disease.
ECG is a useful diagnostic tool and has added an addi -
tional dimension in the patient evaluation not only for car -
diovascular diseases but also for other diseases that affect 
the heart secondarily. The ECG has its own limitations, and 
therefore, its findings should be correlated with the clinical 
findings of patients. It is a graphical representation of the 
electric events produced by the cardiac muscle cells during 
depolarization and repolarization. ECG in dogs is taken in 
a standing position or lateral recumbency (right side down). 
Standardization of the ECG paper is made at 10 mm or 1 mv 
with a paper speed of 25 mm per second.
Echocardiography is a technique that utilizes short 
pulses of ultrasound at a frequency of 2–5  MHz to image 
the heart and great vessels. Sounds waves are produced by 
a piezoelectric crystal incorporated into a transducer that 
converts electrical energy into mechanical (sound) energy 
and vice versa. It can also diagnose the presence of a tumor 
mass in the heart or ductal presence or pericardial or pleural 
effusion.
Doppler echocardiography is a technique for the assess-
ment of the velocity and turbulence of blood flow within 
the heart. A frequency change is produced when ultrasound 
waves strike moving red blood cells, this can be measured 
and analyzed.
Blood pressure is not routinely measured in animals ex-
cept racehorses, because it is virtually not possible to relax 
animals to obtain satisfactory basal pressure readings. The 
rate of disappearance of intravenously injected Evans blue 
from the circulation is an accurate method for measuring 
blood volume. While measuring it, the age and recent phys-
ical activity of animals must be taken into consideration. 
Dogs with extremely high blood pressure may have no signs 
that are visible to the owner. Sudden blindness is the most 
common sign. Blood tests may help with the diagnosis of 
the cause of high blood pressure.
2.3 Diseases of digestive system
The primary function of the mouth is to introduce food into 
the digestive tract, prehension, digestion, and absorption of 
food and water. When any of these become compromised 
through disease or trauma, malnutrition and dehydration 
may result. Dehydration is the major effect in acute diseases 
and shock is an important physiological disturbance in per 
acute diseases. Some degree of abdominal pain is usual in 
most diseases of the alimentary tract. Other abnormalities 
include vomiting, diarrhea, hemorrhage, constipation, and 
scanty defecation.
A complete blood count (CBC), serum biochemistry 
profile, and urinalysis can help differentiate primary GI 
(gastrointestinal) disease from non-GI disease and can 
identify metabolic derangements resulting from GI disease. 
Additional testing, such as liver function tests or an adreno-
corticotropic hormone stimulation test, may be warranted 
depending on the clinical findings and initial test results.
Abdominal radiographs generally do not help diagnose 
GI ulceration, but they can help exclude GI obstruction, in-
tussusceptions, and peritonitis.
Abdominal ultrasonography may show abnormalities in 
GI wall thickness or the presence of a mass, but its primary 
utility is the identification of non-GI lesions.
Endoscopy allows visualization of the esophagus, stom-
ach, duodenum, and colon and identification of mucosal 
lesions and ulcers. Endoscopy also allows for fine needle 
aspirates of lesions or collection of biopsy samples, al -
though full-thickness surgical biopsies may be required

6 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
to identify infiltrative disease and tumors. Ulcerated areas 
should be biopsied only on the periphery to avoid perfo -
ration. Gastric fluid can be tested for pH to help diagnose 
hypersecretory states.
Selective culture for fecal pathogens (e.g., Clostridium 
spp., Salmonella spp., Yersinia spp., Clostridium spp., 
Campylobacter spp., enterotoxigenic Escherichia coli, etc.) 
and evaluation for Clostridium spp. enterotoxin by fecal 
ELISA can be considered.
Chronic diarrhea and weight loss are nonspecific signs 
common to a variety of systemic and metabolic diseases, 
as well as malabsorption, although, typically, systemic dis-
eases cause anorexia. A thorough diagnostic approach in 
dogs and cats with signs suggestive of malabsorption is, 
therefore, needed to help exclude association with possible 
underlying systemic or metabolic disease. A precise diagno-
sis is also important to determine treatment and prognosis.
Multisector CT imaging, available in specialty referral 
practices and university teaching hospitals, can distinguish 
mass lesions, detect changes in the structure of hepatic pa -
renchyma and the biliary system, identify choleliths, detect 
abnormal hepatic perfusion (involving the portal vein, he -
patic artery, or hepatic vein), and portal thrombi and can 
detail the extent of traumatic hepatobiliary injuries.
Percussion of the right side of the abdomen may reveal 
the presence of intestinal tympany and enlargement of the 
liver. Auscultation can give an idea about the state of intes-
tinal activity and abnormal sounds arising from a distended 
organ.
2.4 Diseases of respiratory system
Large and small airways, as well as the lungs, make up the 
respiratory system. Air that is inhaled by a dog through its 
mouth or nose passes into the trachea, which separates into 
the right and left bronchi, and then into the bronchioles, 
which are the lungs’ smaller airways. A thin membrane 
acts as a barrier between the air and the blood in the tiny 
sacs known as alveoli where the bronchioles terminate. In 
the alveoli, oxygen and carbon dioxide are exchanged. The 
 animal can get gravely ill when this exchange breaks down 
or becomes ineffective as a result of illness. The respiratory 
system warms, humidifies, and filters out pollutants to pre-
serve its own sensitive airways.
In dogs, respiratory conditions are typical. Although re-
spiratory tract issues are the most typical source of symp -
toms like coughing and hard breathing, other organ system 
ailments like congestive heart failure can also result in these 
symptoms. The most common respiratory diseases are 
rhinitis, sinusitis, tracheobronchitis, bronchopneumonia, 
pneumonia, aspiration pneumonia, pleural effusion, pyo -
thorax, pneumothorax, etc.
Most serious upper respiratory infections are caused by 
feline rhinotracheitis virus, feline calicivirus, and  chlamydia 
(pneumonitis). Signs and severe symptoms of these highly 
contagious diseases may last up to 6 weeks.
Native commensal bacteria, such as Pasteurella mul-
tocida, Bordetella bronchiseptica, streptococci, staphylo -
cocci, pseudomonads, and coliform bacteria, typically live 
in the lungs, upper trachea, nasopharynx, and nasal passages 
of dogs and cats without causing any symptoms. Infection 
with a primary pathogen (such as distemper, parainfluenza, 
or canine type 2 adenovirus in dogs, or rhinotracheitis vi -
rus or calicivirus in cats), other insults (such as inhaling 
smoke or noxious gases), or diseases like congestive heart 
failure and pulmonary neoplasia may impair the respiratory 
defense mechanisms, leading to opportunistic infections by 
these bacteria.
Evidently, diagnostic tests are necessary to establish the 
presence of numerous respiratory illnesses in small animals. 
Unfortunately, veterinary medicine’s specialization in re -
spiratory medicine is underdeveloped, and the practitioner 
has access to only a small number of advanced tests that can 
accurately detect particular pulmonary illnesses. Diagnosis 
is completely depending on the history and physical exami-
nation done by veterinarians. This will help to determine the 
possible cause and site of respiratory disease.
When obstructive upper airway disease or airway ob -
struction is suspected, chest and neck X-rays may be ben -
eficial. Dogs with lower respiratory symptoms including 
coughing, quick shallow breathing, or hard breathing are 
frequently given chest X-rays. The amount of oxygen in the 
blood is measured by blood gas analysis or pulse oximetry, 
which may be used to determine whether an animal with 
extremely laborious breathing needs oxygen therapy.
The diagnosis of fungal pneumonia frequently makes use 
of fine needle aspirates of the lungs. A sample of the accumu-
lated fluid is frequently taken from dogs with fluid buildup 
in the chest cavity using a needle (thoracocentesis),  allowing 
Auscultation in dog.

Diseases, diagnosis, and management of dogs and cats  Chapter | 1  7
microscopic examination of the fluid. Ultrasonography 
through the chest wall can be used to diagnose diseases that 
develop surrounding the lungs (pleural disorders) and lung 
disease that occurs close to the chest walls.
Runny nose, sneezing, or both may appear out of the 
blue in adult dogs and may indicate a viral or bacterial in -
fection—both extremely rare—or a foreign object lodged 
in the nose. A sample of nasal tissue, computed tomog -
raphy (CT), an endoscopic examination, or other testing 
may be necessary for persistent instances. Fungal infec -
tions may be diagnosed by microscopic examination of 
the nasal tissue; however, the majority of canine bacterial 
nasal infections are brought on by other nasal disorders. 
Sometimes in addition to other tests and examinations, 
blood tests are performed to diagnose fungal respiratory 
infections.
CT scan of dog at veterinary clinical complex.
Unless the vet instructs otherwise, animals with respi -
ratory conditions should typically receive plenty of water. 
It could be simpler to remove airway secretions if the air 
has more humidity. Expectorants, which thin secretions and 
make them simpler for animals to cough up, are occasion -
ally employed, although they are rarely effective. Large 
amounts of secretions may need to be gently suctioned 
away by the veterinarian if the airway obstruction is severe.
2.5 Diseases of urinary system
The kidneys, ureters (tubes connecting the kidneys to the 
bladder), the bladder, and the urethra are all parts of the 
urinary system or tract (the tube through which urine exits 
the body). The urinary system serves a number of crucial 
purposes. It eliminates the waste materials produced when 
food is converted into energy. Also, it keeps the electrolytes 
(salts) and water in the cells of the body in the proper pro -
portion. The creation of the hormones erythropoietin and 
renin, which are crucial for maintaining appropriate blood 
pressure, generating blood cells, and properly absorbing 
salt, is another crucial task.
The majority of bacterial infections that affect the uri -
nary system in small animals are aerobic. Escherichia 
coli, Staphylococcus, Enterococcus, and Streptococcus are 
examples of typical microorganisms. Infection-causing 
 bacteria that are less frequent include Klebsiella, Proteus, 
and Pseudomonas. Cats are more likely than dogs to con -
tract Pasteurella. A rare cause of urinary tract infections, 
mycoplasma is typically discovered in conjunction with 
other microorganisms. By infecting the kidney and numer -
ous other organs, filamentous bacteria that cause leptospiro-
sis spread throughout the world. Rarely do parasites, yeast, 
or fungi invade the urinary system.
Urinary tract bacterial infections often progress from the 
urethra into the bladder and, in some cases, the kidneys. 
Unusual urine flow (such as urine retention), diminished 
urothelial defenses, diminished systemic immunological 
defenses, or insufficient urine concentration are all pre -
disposing factors. With the exception of older, uncastrated 
male dogs who develop bacterial prostatitis, female dogs 
are more prone to urinary tract infections than male dogs. 
Dogs that also have other disorders, such as chronic renal 
disease or hyperadrenocorticism, are more vulnerable.
Feline urological syndrome (FUS) is a disease com -
plex of the urinary system. Causes of this disease include 
diet, urinary pH (acidity), bacteria, viruses, urinary habits, 
and other factors. Signs of FUS include frequent urination 
(spending an unusual amount of time in the litter box), uri -
nary accidents, straining with urination, blood in the urine, 
pain in the abdomen, and increased irritability of the cat. 
Diagnosis should be made by a veterinarian who can test

8 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
the urine. Regular visits to the veterinarian are important 
to prevent or correct serious health problems. To provide 
proper cat care, be aware of serious health threats and use 
preventive measures.
Compared to dogs, cats are more resilient to bacterial 
cystitis. Fewer than 2% of cats aged 1–10 with symptoms 
of the lower urinary tract have a positive bacterial infection 
culture. The most common noninfectious causes of lower 
urinary tract pain and inflammation in adult cats are idio -
pathic cystitis, interstitial cystitis, or urinary bladder stones.
A thorough urinalysis that includes physical and chemi-
cal assessments, as well as microscopic examination of 
preparation of unstained, moist urine may imply a prob -
able UTI diagnosis, enabling prompt treatment of a pain -
ful and potentially life-threatening illness. Microscopical 
detection of bacteria does not necessarily indicate a urinary 
tract infection (UTI). For a UTI to be diagnosed, there must 
be consistent clinical symptoms, a history of infection, or 
other evidence of infection, such as pyuria or hematuria on 
microscopic examination. Apart from bacterial infections, 
other conditions can also cause inflammation. For instance, 
patients with urolithiasis or tumors may have inflammatory 
cells in their urine without also having bacterial infections 
at the same time. If a urinalysis finds protein in the urine, an 
additional urine test called a urine protein/creatinine ratio 
may be necessary.
In the case of bladder stones in dogs, X-rays are the 
most commonly utilized diagnostic tool that veterinarians 
use to confirm a dog has bladder stones. A small percent -
age of bladder stones, however, such as urate stones or any 
stone that is tiny, do not reflect X-rays well and show up 
best on an ultrasound. Surgery to remove the stones is the 
most commonly used treatment for bladder stones that can-
not be dissolved or in emergency cases where a stone has 
blocked the urethra and the dog is not able to urinate. Most 
dogs do very well and recover rapidly after a cystostomy.
In the event of a urinary issue, a veterinarian may carry 
out a variety of further tests. They consist of biopsies, blood 
tests, blood pressure checks, urinalysis, and other urine 
examinations, X-rays, contrast X-rays (tests where a spe -
cific dye is administered to highlight the urinary tract on 
the X-ray), ultrasonography, and cystoscopic examinations. 
In a cystoscopic test, the urethra is entered and a tiny tube 
containing a camera is inserted.
2.6 Diseases of nervous system
Disease in the central nervous system or the peripheral ner-
vous system might alter an animal’s capacity to feel its sur-
roundings. Behavioral changes, seizures, tremors, discomfort, 
numbness, lack of coordination, and weakness or paralysis of 
one or more legs are among the main symptoms of nervous 
system problems. Depending on where and how severe the 
injury is, sensory and motor functions may be affected.
Depending on which portion of the brain is injured, dif-
ferent outcomes follow from brain injuries. A brain stem 
injury may result in loss of balance, limb weakness, overac-
tive reflexes, stupor, or coma. Tremors, a loss of balance, 
and head-to-leg coordination are all symptoms of cerebellar 
damage. Complete or partial blindness, loss of smell, sei -
zures, comas, stupor, pacing or circling behavior, and the 
inability to recognize an owner are all symptoms of cere -
brum damage.
Below the level of the injury, a spinal cord injury can 
result in paralysis and a loss of feeling. Minor spinal cord 
injuries may cause awkward movement and slight limb 
weakness. More limb weakness can result from moderate 
spinal cord injury. A complete lack of movement (paraly -
sis) and sensation can occur in severe spinal cord injuries. 
Paralysis is not a common result of spinal cord injury, 
though. For instance, a lower back spinal cord injury can 
cause loss of bladder control instead of limb paralysis.
Certain viruses or bacteria are the culprits behind ner -
vous system infections. The body’s own overactive immune 
system can induce other inflammations, such as some types 
of meningitis. All of them are autoimmune illnesses. Many 
substances have the potential to harm the neurological sys -
tem. Some examples of these are rat poison, antifreeze, 
chocolate, and sedatives. Several medications can be harm-
ful to the neurological system when used in high dosages. In 
addition to coral and tiger snake venom, botulism, tetanus, 
and tick bites can all impact the neurological system and 
result in paralysis.
The presence of a brain tumor is confirmed using a 
range of tests. Nervous system tumors can be identified by 
plain X-rays, myelography, scintigraphy, computed tomog-
raphy scans, and magnetic resonance imaging. Analyses of 
the cerebrospinal fluid may also be helpful.
A myelogram is an X-ray examination in which the spi-
nal fluid surrounding the spinal cord is dyed with a particu-
lar substance. On a standard X-ray, the spinal cord cannot 
be seen. By injecting this dye, the spinal cord is highlighted 
and becomes apparent on X-rays. This dye may be injected 
into the spinal fluid in the neck region (cisternal myelogram) 
or lower back region (lumbar myelogram). A sample of the 
patient’s spinal fluid is taken right before the dye injection 
and sent to the laboratory for evaluation. Myelograms are a 
challenging and delicate diagnostic procedure that is best 
handled by a veterinary specialist. The procedure requires 
general anesthesia.
In computed tomography (CT), an X-ray tube moves 
around the body and continuously projects a thin fan of 
X-rays through the body. Detectors opposite the tube con -
tinuously monitor the X-ray and its angle for developing a 
proper image. Veterinary CT scans for pets are similar to 
humans and have the same advantages. It allows for a more 
detailed look into the health of tissues and organs and pro -
vides a three-dimensional image of the internal organs.

Diseases, diagnosis, and management of dogs and cats  Chapter | 1  9
Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is the newest form 
of diagnostic imaging being used for both human and veter-
inary medicine. Dog MRI equipment generates a very pow-
erful magnetic field, resulting in detailed anatomic images 
of whatever part of a dog’s body is being scanned. It is used 
to diagnose problems with the brain and spinal cord after 
other tests fail to determine the cause of the animal’s illness. 
Brain diseases diagnosed with an MRI include tumors, in -
farcts (lack of blood to an area of the brain), abscesses, epi-
lepsy, and inflammation of the brain’s covering (meninges).
2.7 Deficiency diseases
While many other disorders of this sort are caused by a lack 
or unbalance of the dietary elements needed by the animal 
for maintenance, development, reproduction, and physi -
cal activity, other metabolic problems in dogs and cats are 
caused by inherited defects. Yet, more often than not, nu -
tritional deficiencies are the direct result of an insufficient 
supply of the necessary nutrients in the diet. Sometimes, 
nutritional deficiencies are a complication of other illnesses 
that interfere with the appropriate digestion and utilization 
of nutritive elements.
Although numerous researches have been conducted on 
the dietary needs of dogs and the consequences of particular 
nutritional deficiencies, little is known about the nutritional 
needs or nutritional illnesses of cats. But because the diets 
of the wild cats and dogs are somewhat comparable, it is 
hypothesized that the two species are likely to experience 
comparable deficiency illnesses. What little is known about 
the nutritional illnesses that affect cats supports this view.
The most commonly occurring errors in the diet of do -
mestic pet animals are deficiencies in vitamins, minerals, 
and proteins of good quality. Except in the case of rickets, 
a positive diagnosis of which can be made by means of the 
X-ray, some information concerning the previous diet of 
the animal is often essential in diagnosing a disease of nu -
tritional origin. Also, the characteristic effects of specific 
deficiencies usually occur in combination with nonspecific 
symptoms which may be induced by one or more of several 
causes. The most common of these nonspecific symptoms 
is the retardation of growth, which may result from simple 
starvation, inadequate proteins of good quality, deficient or 
unbalanced calcium or phosphorus, or a deficiency of one 
or more of several vitamins. Likewise, a degeneration of the 
central and peripheral (outer) nervous system, with result -
ing in coordination of movements, may occur as a result of 
vitamin A deficiency or some type of vitamin B deficiency.
Typically, rickets is described as any alteration in the 
mineral metabolism that leads to faulty or aberrant calci -
fication, or hardening, of developing bones. Lethargy and 
listlessness, an arched neck, a hunched posture, knobby and 
malformed joints, bowed legs, and flabby muscles are some 
of the clinical signs of rickets.
Female dogs and cats occasionally have eclampsia just 
before, during, or right after giving birth to a litter of young. 
It appears to be caused by a calcium shortage, which may be 
accompanied by vitamin D insufficiency. Females who are 
nursing large litters are more likely to experience it since 
they have high calcium requirements for producing milk.
It is common practice to make a diagnosis of vitamin A in-
sufficiency in dogs based on symptoms that emerge in the later 
stages of the illness, when some animals may still not make 
a full recovery even after the deficit is treated. The eye ail -
ment xerophthalmia, which is characterized by this symptom, 
is likely the most readily identifiable one. A lack of vitamin 
A is linked to a number of other less specific and frequently 
harder-to-diagnose dietary origin illnesses. Loss of weight, a 
rough coat and scaly skin, uncoordinated movements, likely 
diminished susceptibility to infections, and, in growing pup-
pies, stunted growth are a few of these symptoms.
2.8 Dermatological disorder
The skin, the largest organ in the body, serves as a barrier 
between an animal and its surroundings and regulates body 
temperature, protects the immune system, enhances sensory 
awareness, and produces vitamin D. In addition to perform-
ing all of these crucial tasks and being directly impacted by 
illnesses, the skin may also share or reflect pathologic pro -
cesses from other tissues. These traits make dermatological 
issues among the most prevalent illnesses in dogs and cats.
The most common dermatological disorders are pyo -
derma, dermatophytosis, malassezia dermatitis, sporotri -
chosis, cryptococcosis, demodicosis, canine scabies, flea 
allergy dermatitis, atopic dermatitis, etc.
The best way to diagnose skin problems is to take a 
thorough medical history and do a comprehensive physical 
and dermatological examination. The evaluation provides 
invaluable data and directs the course of the investigation. 
There should be specific examinations and occasionally, 
treatment trials.
Important dermatology diagnosis procedures include 
skin scrapings, trichograms, fungal and bacterial cultures, 
cytological analysis, and skin biopsies. To detect mites, skin 
scrapings are used; depending on the suspected mite, they 
may be shallow or deep. The obtained sample is examined 
using optical microscopy.
For patients with suspected fungal illnesses, fungus culture 
is advised. The lesion margin should be used to gather hair 
samples and skin scales. Bacterial culture is not frequently 
carried out, but it is advised in cases with pyoderma that is 
resistant to a first therapy or when rods are seen in cytology.
The hairs from the affected area are pulled out for the 
direct study of the hairs, or trichogram, which is then micro-
scopically analyzed. This method can be used to identify ir-
regularities in the hair growth phase as well as the presence 
of dermatophytes and follicle parasites.

10 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
The examination known as cytology, which examines 
tissue cells, is very effective and beneficial in evaluating a 
lesion and determining the next stage in the diagnostic pro-
cess. The sample can be collected via a lesion impression, 
swab, skin scrape, or fine-needle aspiration.
Usually, histopathology combined with clinical findings 
results in a conclusive diagnosis. A skin biopsy is advised 
in cases of atypical lesions, potentially cancerous nodules, 
dermatoses requiring expensive treatments, when the pa -
tient’s health is at risk, when there has been a poor response 
to prior treatment, and to rule out other possible diagnosis.
2.9 Endocrine disorder in dogs and cats
The most common endocrine diseases in dogs are Cushing 
disease, hypothyroidism, and diabetes mellitus. The most 
common endocrine diseases in cats are hyperthyroidism 
and diabetes mellitus.
Diabetes mellitus is a group of metabolic diseases 
characterized by hyperglycemia resulting from defects in 
insulin secretion, insulin action, or both. Diabetes is char -
acterized by a rise in blood glucose levels (hyperglycemia), 
passing of glucose (glucosuria) and ketone bodies (ketonu-
ria) in urine, and deficiency or inability to utilize insulin for 
the normal metabolism of carbohydrates, proteins, and fats. 
Clinical signs of diabetes are related to these biochemical 
alterations hyperglycemia, ketonuria, and glucosuria, in ad-
dition to damage to other systems and general signs include 
anorexia, depression, lethargy, weight loss, polydipsia, and 
polyuria.
Diagnosis is usually based on clinical and pathological 
findings. Diabetes can be diagnosed by the presence of four 
classic signs that include polyuria, polyphagia, polydipsia, 
and, foremost, hyperglycemia. In blood, hemoglobin A1c 
(HbA1c) may be considered as a biomarker for the presence 
and severity of hyperglycemia, implying diabetes or predia-
betes, or, over time, as a “biomarker for a risk factor.” These 
are the glycosylated products involving a glycation reaction 
between a sugar (glucose or fructose) and a protein (Hb 
for glycalated Hb and albumin for fructosamine) or amine 
(fructosamine). These are produced by nonenzymatic reac-
tions. They are used for measuring blood sugar in diabetes.
The thyroid gland produces fewer T4 and T3 hormones 
when someone has hypothyroidism, an endocrine condition. 
Yet, the most prevalent endocrinopathy in dogs rarely affects 
cats. Around 95% of adult dogs with hypothyroidism have 
the primary loss of the thyroid gland. Dermatological dis -
orders are observed in 60%–80% of hypothyroidism cases, 
and thyroid hormones are crucial for maintaining healthy 
skin function. Alopecia (usually bilaterally symmetric and 
sparing the head and limbs), superficial pyoderma, dry and 
desquamated skin, dry or oily seborrhea, brittle and easily 
pulled hair, hyperkeratosis, hyperpigmentation, otitis, inad-
equate wound healing, pruritus, myxedema, and obesity are 
common findings. Clinical symptoms, serum TSH totals, 
and free T4 levels are used to make the diagnosis.
Cushing syndrome, also known as hyperadrenocorti -
cism, is brought on by the adrenal glands’ chronically high 
cortisol release. It happens iatrogenically, following the 
administration of synthetic glucocorticoids, or spontane -
ously, as a result of inherent hyperfunction of the pituitary 
or adrenal glands. Eighty to eighty-five percent of sponta -
neous hyperadrenocorticism in dogs and cats is hypophysis 
dependent. The diagnosis is made based on clinical symp -
toms connected to laboratory analysis and diagnostic imag-
ing results. Hyperadrenocorticism is confirmed by plasma 
ACTH, low dexamethasone dose suppression test, ACTH 
stimulation test, and urine cortisol/creatinine ratio. To rule 
out iatrogenic causes, it is also critical to learn the history of 
glucocorticoid usage.
Hyperthyroidism is a common disease in cats and 
mostly afflicts cats middle-aged and older. Thyrotoxicosis 
or hyperthyroidism is caused by an increase in the produc -
tion of thyroid hormones (known as T3 and T4) from an 
enlarged thyroid gland. In most cases, the enlargement of 
thyroid glands is caused by a noncancerous tumor called 
an adenoma. Some rare cases of hyperthyroid disease are 
caused by malignant tumors known as thyroid adenocarci -
nomas. Most cats with hyperthyroidism have elevated levels 
of the thyroid hormone T4 in their bloodstream.
Red mange caused by Demodex canis.

Diseases, diagnosis, and management of dogs and cats  Chapter | 1  11
2.10 Neonatal diseases
Due to the high rates of morbidity and mortality that are 
linked with the newborn period in dogs and cats ranging from 
7% to 35% in dogs and from 14% to 16% in cats, it continues 
to be a significant issue for veterinarians and breeders. The 
health of a litter can be affected by a wide range of events 
during pregnancy, delivery, and the first few weeks of life, 
all of which need to be adequately addressed by the breeder 
and the veterinarian. Litter viability can be directly impacted 
by maternal, neonatal, environmental, and birth-related vari-
ables. Neonatal mortality is also influenced by ignorance, 
poor management, a lack of neonatal care, and neglect.
Selecting the best parents for mating begins with the 
optimal management for the birth of healthy puppies and 
kittens, and genetics is a decisive element for successful 
reproduction. Prior to mating, the vaccination of females 
is a crucial consideration. Females who are not immunized 
are more likely to experience miscarriage, premature birth, 
stillbirth, and neonatal mortality due to infectious illnesses. 
Also, the puppy’s and kitten’s immunity will be affected by 
the puppy’s and kitten’s inadequate immunization status, 
leaving neonates exposed to diseases during the neonatal 
period. With the possibility of parasitic transmission via 
placental, lactogenic, and ambient contamination, maternal 
deworming before and during pregnancy is also crucial for 
the health of the litter.
Puppies and kittens are frequently more susceptible to 
getting numerous infectious infections during the perinatal 
period since their immune systems are still developing. In 
general, bacterial, viral, and parasite diseases cause higher 
rates of morbidity and mortality in children than in adults. 
Because passive immunity is not transferred when colos -
trum is not consumed soon after birth, newborns will be 
more susceptible to illnesses. Moreover, unclean environ -
ments are more likely to support a number of diseases that 
can endanger the lives of puppies and kittens.
Dogs and cats experience significant rates of mortality 
during the perinatal period, and the causes of death and risk 
factors are frequently not looked into. The veterinarian must 
have a fundamental understanding of physiology, pregnancy 
and neonatal care, and preventive measures in addition to be-
ing aware of the key elements involved in managing  puppies 
and kittens. Greater neonatal survival and reproductive 
success are impacted by breeders receiving instruction on 
proper handling and by training their staff annually.
2.11 Bacterial diseases
Bacterial diseases are a group of diseases that are caused by 
bacteria either gram positive or gram negative. Bacteria are 
single-cell prokaryotes, they do not have a true nucleus but 
all bacteria contain both DNA and RNA. The virulence or 
pathogenicity of various bacteria and mechanisms by which 
they cause disease is of a different kind. Bacteria multiply 
rapidly and spread all over tissue and cause septicemia (e.g., 
anthrax) and toxemia (e.g., tetanus). Bacteria are ubiquitous 
and affect almost all species of animal and some bacteria 
play a major role in zoonosis also.
Grams-positive bacteria:
 1. Streptococcal infections—Streptococcus canis, Strep-
tococcus equi  subsp. zooepidemicus, Streptococcus 
pyogenes
 2. Enterococcus spp. Infections— Enterococcus faecalis 
and Enterococcus faecium
 3. Staphylococcal Infections— Staphylococcus pseudin -
termedius, Staphylococcus aureus, and Staphylococcus 
schleiferi
 4. Rhodococcus equi infection—Rhodococcus equi
 5. Corynebacterium Infection— Corynebacterium au -
riscanis, Corynebacterium urealyticum
 6. Listeriosis—Listeria monocytogenes
 7. Erysipelothrix Infections—Erysipelothrix rhusiopath-
iae and Erysipelothrix tonsillarum
 8. Anthrax—Bacillus anthracis
 9. Canine nocardiosis—Nocardia asteroides
 10. Canine actinomycosis—Actinomyces viscosus
 11. Feline leprosy—Mycobacterium lepraemurium
Grams-negative bacteria:
 1. Escherichia coli infection—Escherichia coli 
 2. Proteus infection—Proteus mirabilis
 3. Klebsiella infection—Klebsiella pneumonia
 4. Serratia marcescens infection—Serratia marcescens
 5. Enterobacter infection—Enterobacter spp.
 6. Citrobacter infection—Citrobacter freundii, Citrobacter 
koseri
 7. Pasteurella infection—Pasteurella multocida, Pasteurella 
canis, Pasteurella dagmatis, and Pasteurella stomatis
 8. Pseudomonas infection—Pseudomonas aeruginosa
 9. Canine brucellosis—Brucella canis, Brucella abortus
 10. Chlamydial infection (feline pneumonitis)—Chlamydia 
felis
 11. Feline infectious anemia—Mycoplasma haemofelis
 12. Leptospirosis—Leptospira icterohemorrhagica, Lepto-
spira pomona, Leptospira canicola
Diagnosis is a very important key to cure the disease. For 
diagnosis, sample collection and its transportation is very 
important. The sample may be tissue, swabs, discharge, 
skin lesion sample, blood, feces, urine, abscesses, eye, milk, 
etc. As soon as the sample is processed, the results are bet -
ter. Clinical findings, e.g., pustules, are found on the skin 
in streptococcus infection, jaundice and nephritis in lepto -
spirosis, etc. Laboratory tests like complete blood count, 
biochemical, urine examination, and fecal examination can 
also be useful for diagnosis. 
Identification of infective agents can be done with the 
help of different staining procedures like gram staining for

12 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
grams positive, e.g., Streptococcus and grams negative, 
e.g., E. coli , Diluted carbol fuchsine stain, Ziehl-Neelsen 
or acid-fast staining for mycobacterium, modified Ziehl-
Neelsen staining, e.g., Brucella, Giemsa staining, e.g., 
Mycoplasma haemofelis, Polychrome methylene blue stain-
ing (M’ Fadyeans reaction) for anthrax, etc.
Bacteriological media are also helpful for the isolation 
and identification of various bacteriological agents. Some 
very commonly used bacteria media are chemically defined 
media, nutritive media, e.g., nutrient agar for fastidious or -
ganism, enriched media, e.g., selenite broth for salmonella 
isolation, chocolate agar for haemophilus, selective media, 
e.g., MacConkey agar for enterobacteriaceae and other 
grams-negative bacteria, brilliant green agar for salmonella 
isolation, Edwards media for streptococci, indicator me -
dia, e.g., MacConkey agar for enterobacteriaceae and other 
grams-negative bacteria, Edwards media for streptococci, 
blood agar, XLD agar for salmonella isolation, etc.
Biochemical tests for bacterial identification like cata -
lase test, oxidase, urease test, V oges-Proskauer test, hydro-
gen sulfate, and indole test are also used as a diagnostic 
tool.
Molecular and immunological methods include bacteria- 
specific antibodies that are available for the identification of 
specific bacteria and molecular diagnosis may be performed 
with the help of PCR and ELISA.
Management includes the use of antimicrobial agents on 
the basis of antibiotic sensitivity tests, serological examina-
tion must be continued in a regular routine. strict sanitary 
measures should be adopted.
2.12 Viral disease
Viruses are considered as an obligate intracellular organ -
ism, which is dead particle out of the living cell, they syn -
thesize their proteins by the host cell machinery. Viruses 
contain only a single type of nucleic acid either DNA or 
RNA. Viruses are responsible for many fatal infections in 
canine and feline, e.g., Rabies, parvovirus infection, canine 
distemper, etc. Some viruses play an important role in zoo-
nosis, e.g., Influenza.
Some most commonly found viral diseases of dogs and 
cats with their causative agent are as follows:
 1. Rabies—genus Lyssavirus (single-stranded RNA vi -
rus). Rabies is a viral infection possible in all mam -
mals, including men. It is transmitted by the bite or 
scratch of an infected cat or other animal. It may also 
be transmitted by saliva deposited into an open wound
 2. Canine distemper—genus Morbillivirus (family Para-
myxoviridae) (negative-stranded RNA virus)
 3. Infectious canine hepatitis (ICH)—Canine Adenovirus 
1 (CAdV-1) (double-stranded DNA virus) genus Mast-
adenovirus
 4. Feline Adenovirus Infection—feline adenovirus 1 (FAdV-1) 
(double-stranded DNA virus) genus Mastadenovirus
 5. Canine Herpesvirus Infection—Canid alphaherpesvi -
rus 1 (CHV-1) genus Varicellovirus
 6. Influenza Virus Infections—influenza viruses (Ortho -
myxoviridae)
 7. Canine Parainfluenza Virus Infection—canine parain -
fluenza viruses (family Paramyxoviridae, genus Rubu-
lavirus). Simian virus 5 (SV5), parainfluenza virus 5, 
canine parainfluenza 2
 8. Canine Respiratory Coronavirus Infection—Canine 
Respiratory Coronavirus genus Betacoronavirus of the 
Coronaviridae family
 9. Kennel cough or canine infectious tracheobronchitis—
CHV-1, CAdV-2, CDV , CPIV , CRCoV , and CIV
 10. Other viruses that infect dogs and cats—Canine Para -
influenza Viruses, Novel Canine Respiratory Viruses, 
Canine Pneumovirus, Pantropic Canine Coronavirus, 
Canine Bocavirus, Canine Hepacivirus
 11. Canine Parvovirus Infections—Canine Parvovirus-2 
variants family Parvoviridae, subfamily Parvoviridae, 
genus Protoparvovirus
 12. Feline Panleukopenia Virus Infection—Feline panleu-
kopenia virus/feline parvovirus FPV
 13. Feline Coronavirus Infections—Feline coronavirus 
family Coronaviridae, genus Coronavirus
 14. Feline Infectious Peritonitis—Feline Infectious Perito-
nitis Virus (Feline coronavirus family)
 15. Feline Leukemia Virus Infection and Fading kitten 
syndrome—Feline Leukemia Virus, gammaretrovirus, 
Oncornavirus subfamily of retroviruses. Feline leuke -
mia is a contagious disease caused by a virus that is 
spread by saliva, urine, and other body fluids from an 
infected cat. There is no effective treatment. A vaccine 
is available that prevents leukemia.
 16. Feline Immunodeficiency Virus Infection—Feline Im-
munodeficiency Virus, family Retroviridae, subfamily 
Orthoretrovirinae, genus Lentivirus
 17. Feline Herpesvirus Infections—Feline Herpesvirus 
1 (family Herpesviridae, an alphaherpesvirus), Felis 
 catus gammaherpesvirus 1 (family Herpesviridae, ge -
nus Percavirus, a gammaherpesvirus)
 18. Feline Calicivirus Infections—Feline Calicivirus, fam-
ily Caliciviridae, genus Vesivirus
 19. Feline Foamy (SyncytiumForming) Virus Infection—
Feline Foamy virus, family Retroviridae, subfamily 
Spumaretrovirinae
 20. Paramyxovirus Infections—family Paramyxoviridae; 
genera Morbillivirus (feline morbillivirus [FeMV],  
canine distemper virus [CDV])
 21. Feline Poxvirus Infections—Poxviruses (family Pox -
viridae, genus Orthopoxvirus)
 22. Papillomavirus Infections—Papillomaviruses (family 
Papillomaviridae)

Diseases, diagnosis, and management of dogs and cats  Chapter | 1  13
2.12.1 Diagnosis of viral diseases
On the basis of history clinical signs like hyper salivation, 
nervous signs in case of Rabies, hemorrhagic gastroenteritis 
in parvovirus infection.
For laboratory, diagnosis collection of samples from live 
animals (feces, nasal discharge, blood, etc.) and from a dead 
animal (affected organs) is very important. Various labora-
tory tests can be performed to aid in the diagnosis of viral 
infection.
Virus demonstration can be done with the use of various 
modern laboratory procedures:
● Detection of virus—by electron microscopy
● Detection of antigen—by FAT, IPT
● Detection of antibody—by ELISA
● Detection of nucleic acid—by RTPCR
Virus Isolation is also a very important part of diagnosis. It 
can be done with the help of cell lines which will be used 
according to the virus like purified chicken embryo cell 
lines, human diploid cells for rabies. 
Detection of inclusion body (negri bodies in case of ra -
bies virus infection, Bollinger bodies in case of pox virus 
infection, etc.) can be detected in affected tissue of a par -
ticular organ or organ system.
Serological tests like virus neutralization test and ELISA 
(Enzyme Linked Immuno Sorbent Assay) are used as an ad-
vanced diagnostic tool for the isolation and identification 
of viruses.
Management of viral diseases can be done with proper 
vaccination, the use of antiviral agents based on the detec -
tion of viruses along with symptomatic treatment.
2.13 Fungal disease of dogs and cats
Fungi are microorganism that infects animals as well as 
humans and cause disease conditions known as myco -
ses. Mycoses may be deep or superficial. Deep mycosis 
includes life-threatening systemic infection of fungi, sub -
cutaneous mycosis, and endemic mycosis. Superficial 
mycosis includes skin and mucosal surface infection, e.g., 
Malassezia dermatitis. Fungi grow mainly in worms and 
moist areas of the body. Many fungal infections are resis -
tant to commonly used antifungal drugs and are zoonotic 
in nature.
Some fungal infections which infect dog and cats are as 
follows:
 1. Dermatophytosis—dermatophytic fungi, i.e., genera 
Microsporum and Trichophyton, e.g., Microsporum 
canis, Nannizzia gypsea  or Microsporum gypseum, 
Trichophyton mentagrophytes
 2. Malassezia Dermatitis— Malassezia pachydermatis  
(lipophilic yeast). It is normal mycobiota of canine and 
feline skin
 3. Blastomycosis—Blastomyces dermatitidis, Blastomy -
ces gilchristii, Blastomyces helices (dimorphic fungi)
 4. Histoplasmosis—Histoplasma capsulatum (dimorphic 
fungi). Cats appear to be as susceptible as or slightly 
more susceptible to Histoplasmosis than dogs
 5. Cryptococcosis (most common systemic mycosis of 
cats)—Cryptococcus neoformans, Cryptococcus gattii
 6. Coccidioidomycosis—Coccidioides immitis, Coccidi-
oides posadasii (dimorphic fungi)
 7. Paracoccidioidomycosis—Paracoccidioides brasilien-
sis and Paracoccidioides lutzii
 8. Sporotrichosis—Sporothrix schenckii
 9. Candidiasis—Candida albicans (yeasts)
 10. Rhodotorulosis—Rhodotorula spp.
 11. Aspergillosis–Aspergillus fumigatus, Aspergillus ni -
ger, Aspergillus flavus
 12. Pneumocystosis—Pneumocystis carinii
 13. Rhinosporidiosis—Rhinosporidium seeberi
Diagnosis can be done on the basis of history and clinical 
signs like mycotic stomatitis in kittens in case of Candida 
albicans infection. 
Detection of fungus can be done by sample collection by 
a skin scraping, direct microscopy, staining by Lactophenol 
cotton blue staining, woods lamp test in case of dermato -
phytosis (Microsporum canis—apple green color), isolation 
of fungus by its culture in Sabouraud dextrose agar which 
gives colony characteristics like white to cream shiny high 
convex heaving a pleasant berry smell in Candida.
Ringworm is a contagious skin infection caused by a 
fungus. It may be airborne or found in the soil. Ringworm 
causes hair loss, usually in a somewhat circular pattern, 
leaving the skin dry, raised, and crusty. Ringworm lesions 
are usually found first on the face, ears, or paws, but with -
out treatment, they can cover the entire body. A veterinarian 
should diagnose ringworm and can prescribe proper topical 
and/or systemic medication.
Serological tests like AGID, counter immunoelectro -
phoresis, and molecular tests targeting 18s RNA, 26s RNA, 
and PCR are advanced diagnostic tools for the isolation and 
identification of different causative agents of fungal dis -
eases in dogs and cats.
Management of fungal diseases can be done with the 
help of antifungal drugs after isolation and detection of fun-
gus, regular changing and washing of clothing of animals, 
stopping sniffing of waste materials, and proper sanitation 
of surroundings.
2.14 Parasitic diseases of canine and feline
The parasite is defined as an organism that depends on an -
other organism (i.e., host) and takes nutrition directly from 
the host. They are metazoans like helminths, arthropods, or 
protozoans like unicellular organisms.

14 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
Parasites can be classified into two types that are as 
follows:
● Endoparasite [internal parasite]—e.g., Dipylidium cani-
num [double-pore tapeworm of dog], Dirofilaria immitis 
[heartworm of dog], etc.
● Ectoparasite [external parasite]—Ctenocephalides canis 
[dog flea], Ctenocephalides felis [cat flea], Dermacentor 
variabillis [American dog tick], Rhipicephalus sanguin-
eus [brown dog tick], etc.
Parasitic diseases are diseases caused by parasites infec -
tion or infestation. Parasitic diseases are major threats to 
the health of animals like poor growth, reduced weight and 
increased susceptibility to other infectious disease. Higher 
mortality in pups due to ancylostomiasis is an example of 
a fatal parasitic disease in dogs. Another important thing in 
the veterinary parasitology of canine and feline is the trans-
mission of canine and feline parasites to and from humans 
which cause the disease known as zoonosis which has great 
concern. Example—hydatidosis, where the human is acci -
dentally infected with a larval tapeworm when ingests an 
egg of Echinococcus granulosus from dog feces, and toxo-
plasmosis due to Toxoplasma gondii which is generally a 
parasite of cat but in humans it causes abortion. 
2.14.1 Trematodes [fluke] diseases in dogs 
and cats
The most important trematode diseases of dogs are as follows:
● Fasciolosis—Fasciola hepatica [liver fluke]
● Dicrocoelium infection— D. dendriticum  [lancet fluke 
or small liver fluke]
● Schistosomiosis—S. incognitum [blood fluke]
● Opisthorchis infection—Opisthorchis tenuicollis
● Oriental or Chinese liver fluke infection— Clonorchis 
sinensis
● Lung fluke infection—Paragonimus westermani
● Intestinal fluke infection—Echinochasmus perfoliatus
Trematodes diseases of cats:
● Fasciolosis—Fasciola hepatica [live fluke] 
● Platynosomum infection— P . fastosum [liver and bile 
duct]
● Opisthorchis infection— Opisthorchis tenuicollis  [cat 
liver fluke]
● Lung fluke infection—Paragonimus westermani
2.14.2 Cestodal [flatworm] diseases in dog
● Taeniasis—T. hydatigena, T. ovis, T. pisiformis, T. krab-
bei, T. multiceps, T. serialis
● Echinococcosis—Echinococcus granulosus
● Dipylidium infection— Dipylidium caninum  (double-
pore tapeworm of dog)
● Diphyllobothrium infection—D. latum [absorb vitamin 
B12 and cause pernicious anemia]
● Spirometra infection— Spirometra mansoni  [zoonotic 
parasite]
Flatworm infection in cat:
● Taenia infection—Taenia taeniaeformis 
● Diphyllobothrium infection
● Spirometra infection
2.14.3 Nematodes [roundworm] infection  
in dog
● Toxocara infection—T. canis [arrow-headed worm] in 
human Toxocara canis larva cause visceral larva mi -
grans [VLM]
● Strongyloides infection—S. stecoralis [thread worm]
● Ancylostomiasis [hookworm of dog]—Ancylostoma cani-
num [each parasite sucks 0.1 mL blood/day and causes mi-
crocytic hypochromic anemia]. Cutaneous larva migrans 
[CLM] in man caused by the larva of ancylostoma.
● Lungworm infection— Filariodes osleri  [hemorrhagic 
wart-like lesion at the bifurcation of trachea]
● Eye worm infection—Thelazia callipaeda [conjunctival 
and lacrimal sac affected]
● Spirocercosis—Spirocerca lupi [oesophageal tumor worm]
● Stomach worm infection—Ganathostoma spinigerum
● Heartworm infection— Dirofilaria immitis  [venacaval 
syndrome]
● Whipworm infection—Trichuris vulpis [large intestine 
affected]
● Kidney worm infection—Dictoyphyma renale [damage 
kidney parenchyma]
Nematodes [roundworm] in cat:
● Toxocara infection—T. felis 
● Stomach worm infection— Physaloptera praeputialis, 
Gnathostoma spinigerum
● Eyeworm infection—Thelazia sp.
2.14.4 Arthopodes infestation [external 
parasite] in dogs and cats
Arthopodes [insecta  + acarins] act as intermediate host or 
vector also. Example— Dirofilaria immitis [heartworm of 
dog] have an intermediate host, i.e., mosquitoes [anoph -
eles, ades, and culex], in case of Spirocerca lupi infection 
beetle acts as intermediate host in case of Dipylidium cani-
num [double-pore tapeworm of dog] intermediate host is 
flea [Ctenocephalides canis in dog and in case of feline is 
Ctenocephalides felis] and also lice [Trichodectes canis].
They also can act as vector like tabanus, haematopata fly, 
haematobia and other flies act as vector for Trypanosoma 
evansi infection in the dog.

Diseases, diagnosis, and management of dogs and cats  Chapter | 1  15
External parasites are “bugs” (insects) that live on the 
outside of a cat’s body and include fleas, ticks, lice, and 
mites. They cause irritation and may transmit some diseases 
to other cats. Careful skin examination by a veterinarian can 
detect these parasites.
Fleas are the most common external parasite of cats. 
Fleas and flea dirt are readily seen in a cat’s hair coat. Flea 
control should be implemented at the earliest sign of flea 
infestation because fleas multiply rapidly and a small prob-
lem becomes a major one in a short time.
Ticks are most prevalent in early spring and most 
commonly found on outdoor cats that get into the un -
derbrush and wooded areas. Ticks can transmit several 
diseases (including Rocky Mountain Spotted Fever) and 
should be removed with care. Grasp the tick near its head 
with a pair of tweezers and pull it away from the skin 
with a firm tug.
Lice are small, light-colored parasites that are transmit -
ted from cat to cat and can be seen at the base of the hair. 
Signs of lice infestation (pediculosis) are a rough and dry 
haircoat, matted hair, and scratching and biting of the skin. 
Lice are effectively controlled with a variety of chemicals 
available from a veterinarian.
Ear mites are easily transmitted from cat to cat and dog 
to cat. Signs of infestations are head shaking and scratch -
ing at the ears. If untreated, ear mites predispose the ear to 
secondary bacterial infection. Treatment requires having a 
veterinarian clean the ear and use miticidal drugs.
Some other important external parasites of dogs and cats 
are as follows:
● Blood-sucking parasite—like tick [Rhipicephalus 
sanguineus]
● Skin myiasis [maggoted wound]
● Demodicosis—Demodex canis  [follicle mite] and in 
pure breed, cats have Demodex cati
● Pnemonyssus caninum [mite which is affect nasal pas -
sage and sinuses of dogs]
● Scabies—Sarcoptes canis [burrowing mite]
● Notoedres cati mite infestation in main cats
● Otodectes cynotis [ear mange] found in dog and cat
● Linguatula serrata [tongue worm]—dog definitive host
Diagnosis of parasite infection is based on anamnesis (age, 
sex, breed and duration of illness), clinical sign [example—
dragging of the anus in Dipylidium caninum infection, 
spectacle eye in demodicosis], urine examination [e.g., 
finding eggs of Dioctophyma renale], sputum examination 
[for eggs of Paragonimus westermani], milk examination 
[migrating larvae of Toxocara canis, Ancylostoma cani -
num], fecal examination, etc. 
A fecal examination is done to detect the various stages 
of parasites in the feces of affected animals. Fecal examina-
tion is of two types, i.e., Qualitative examination and quan-
titative examination.
The qualitative examination includes the direct smear 
method, floatation method [for nematodes egg mainly], and 
sedimentation method [for trematodes egg mainly]. The 
quantitative examination method includes the McMaster 
egg counting technique [to determine the severity of infec -
tion] and Stoll’s technique.
Other diagnostic methods are skin scrapping examina -
tion [for Demodex mange, sarcoptes mange], examination 
of blood (thin or thick blood smear for blood protozoa), 
Knott’s technique for detection of microfilariae [example—
microfilaria of Dirofilaria immitis], biopsy [example—for 
detection of visceral leishmaniosis], and immunologic and 
molecular parasite diagnosis.
Management of parasite
● Chemical control:
● Chemotherapy—example in babesiosis diminazene 
aceturate use, pyrantel pamoate in ancylostomosis, etc.
● Chemoprophylaxis—follow deworming schedule in 
dogs and cats
● Chemo-immunoprophylaxis
● Immunological control—vaccines
Example—Ancylostoma caninum immunize with 
third larvae that have been attenuated with ionizing 
radiation.
● Intermediate host or vector control:
● Chemical control—use insecticide and acaricide like 
malathion, deltamethrin, lindane, etc.
● Biological control—use Gumbusia fishes for mos -
quitoes control, hymenopterans fly for ticks control, 
and bacteria Bacillus thuriengiensis for mosquitoes 
control.
● Mechanical control—intermediate host/vector like 
ticks, lice, etc., are collected manually and killed by 
using the hard objects.
2.15 Protozoal diseases of dogs and cats
Protozoa are unicellular eukaryotes microscopic organisms. 
They have well-defined nuclei as well as other cell organ -
elles. They may be free-living or parasitic. Many protozoa 
are transmitted by vector. With the help of advanced tech -
niques, we find many new species and strains of pathogenic 
protozoa. Parasitic protozoa are the cause of important zoo-
notic diseases of dogs and cats worldwide, such as toxo -
plasmosis, leishmaniosis, giardiasis, and cryptosporidiosis.
Some protozoal diseases of dogs and cats are as follows:
● Toxoplasmosis—Toxoplasma gondii (Cats are the de -
finitive host and are the only species known to complete 
the sexual phase of T. gondii)
● Neosporosis—Neospora caninum (Dogs are the defini -
tive hosts)
● Sarcocystosis—Sarcocystis felis , Sarcocystis canis , 
Sarcocystis caninum, and Sarcocystis neurona

16 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
● Leishmaniosis (cutaneous and visceral leishmaniosis)—
Leishmania chagasi, Leishmania infantum
● Giardiasis—Giardia lambia, Giardia canis, Giardia 
cati, Giardia duodenalis
● Trichomonosis—Tritrichomonas foetus  or Tritricho-
monas blagburni
● Cryptosporidiosis—Cryptosporidium canis, 
Cryptosporidium felis, Cryptosporidium parvum
● Cyclosporiasis—Cyclospora cayetanensis
● Cystoisosporiasis—Cats are the definitive hosts for Cys-
toisospora felis  and Cystoisospora rivolta, Cystoisos -
pora canis, Cystoisospora ohioensis, Cystoisospora 
neorivolta, and Cystoisospora burrowsi are described in 
dogs
● Rangeliosis—Rangelia vitalii (dogs)
● Amebiasis:
Nonenteric (Free-Living)—Acanthamoeba, Balamu-
thia, and Naegleria
Gastrointestinal Amebiasis and Balantidiasis—
Entamoeba and Balantidium
Diagnosis is mainly based on clinical signs like severe diar-
rhea with blood and mucous along with abdominal pain and 
tenesmus in case of invasive amoebiosis. Chronic diarrhea 
and steatorrhea in puppies and kittens in case of giardiasis. 
On microscopic examination of meat sample in trichinella 
(trichinoscopy), fecal examination—trophozoites and cysts 
are found ex. Monkey face-like trophozoites with falling 
leaf motility in saline mount and cyst in iodine mount in 
case of giardia infection. 
The staining technique is also helpful in the diagnosis of 
protozoa ex. In Iodine, wet-mount cysts of Acanthamoeba 
appear yellowish brown. Modified Ziehl-Neelsen staining 
of oocytes of cryptosporidium looks pinkish red color.
Isolation or culture ex. NNN (novy-mac Neak Nicolle) 
media is biphasic media for Leishmania, Diamond media in 
case of giardiasis, etc.
Serological diagnostic tests like antigen detection ex. 
Copro antigen by ELISA in giardia, Sabin-Feldman dye test 
in case of toxoplasma. Indirect fluorescent antibody test, direct 
agglutination test for neospora caninum. Delayed hypersensi-
tivity test, Montenegro test for leismaniosis. Molecular diagno-
sis is done with the help of specific DNA sequence and PCR.
2.15.1 Haemoprotozoal diseases of dogs  
and cats
There are a wide range of protozoal parasites present in the 
blood of cats and dogs which are transmitted with the help of 
vectors ex. tabenus fly and ticks (riphicephalus, dermacen -
taer). These protozoa may be extracellular ex. Trypanosoma 
or intracellular ex. Babesia. Haemoprotozoa shows severe 
systemic illness in acute or chronic forms.
● Ehrlichiosis—Ehrlichia canis (canine monocytic ehrlichi-
osis), Ehrlichia ewingii (canine granulocytic ehrlichiosis)
● Anaplasmosis—Anaplasma phagocytophilum (granulo-
cytic anaplasmosis), Anaplasma platys  (thrombocyto -
tropic anaplasmosis)
● Haemobartonella infection —Haemobartonella canis , 
Haemobartonella felis
● Babesiosis—Babesia canis  (large protozoa), Babesia 
gibsoni (small protozoa)
● Trypanosomosis—Trypanosoma evansi
Diagnosis on the basis of clinical signs and history makes on 
owners complaints as ticks are present on the body of the pa-
tient and the patient shows clinical signs like hemoglobinuria 
in babesia, generalized lymph adenopathy in ehrlichiosis. 
Laboratory diagnosis based on complete blood count shows 
anemia and thrombocytopenia in ehrlichiosis. The blood 
smear shows an extracellular parasite in case of trypanosoma 
infection, an intracellular parasite found in RBC ex. Babesia 
and Haemobartonella, in neutrophils ex. Ehrlichia ewingii, 
in monocyte ex. Ehrlichia canis, in platelates ex. Anaplasma 
platys, buffy coat smear examination ex. trypsanosoma. 
Serological diagnosis includes complement fixation 
test, ELISA, countercurrent immunoelectrophoresis in 
babesia, and IFAT in case of Ehrlichia infection. Various 
commercial kits are available (4Dx test) for the diagnosis 
of Lyme disease, ehrlichiosis, anaplasmosis, and heartworm 
diseases. Molecular diagnosis is based on the identification 
of specific DNA sequence of the pathogen ex. BcMSA1 and 
BcSA1 in case of babsia infection, and sequence analysis of 
16SrRNA in Ehrlichia.
For the therapeutic management of haemoprotozoal 
diseases in dogs and cats, specific drugs are available for 
particular haemoprotozoal infections like doxycyclin for 
ehrlichiosis, diminazine aceturate for babesiosis, etc. Repell 
tick by use of a tick collar, use of acaricidal agents like ami-
traz, deltamethrin, and removal of ectoparasite with the help 
of drugs like Avermectins (Ivermectin or doramectin) or 
Sarolaner, flunalaner, or Afoxolaner can also help.
2.16 Hereditary diseases in dogs and cats
The most common hereditary diseases in dogs are hip dys -
plasia, hypothyroidism, diabetes mellitus, progressive reti -
nal atrophy, entropion, ectropion, cataract, cryptorchid male, 
overshot, undershot jaw, wry mouth, missing teeth, allergic 
skin disease, and night blindness. Dogs affected by genetic 
disorders should not be selected for breeding. In dogs with 
hip dysplasia, the ball and socket do not fit or develop prop-
erly, and they rub and grind instead of sliding smoothly. 
It is hereditary and is especially common in larger dogs, 
like the Great Dane, Saint Bernad, Labrador Retriever, and 
German Shepherd dogs. Hip dysplasia, which occurs across 
all mixed-breed and purebred dogs, is the most common 
inherited musculoskeletal disorder. Palpable hip laxity can 
predict hip dysplasia and later osteoarthritic changes. A hip 
radiograph under general anesthetic is the preferred method

Diseases, diagnosis, and management of dogs and cats  Chapter | 1  17
for diagnosing hip dysplasia. Clinical signs and palpable 
joint laxity may also indicate hip dysplasia.
Progressive retinal atrophy (PRA) cause dogs to even -
tually lose their vision. Entropion is the inward folding of 
the eyelid, whereas ectropion is a condition where there is 
outward turning or sagging of the eyelid. Ectropion is found 
mostly in the lower eyelid. It is considered a hereditary dis-
order and is often diagnosed in dogs of age  less than a year 
old. Overshot and undershot jaws are types of misalignments 
of the mandible, or lower jaw, and the maxilla, or upper jaw. 
Overshot refers to an upper jaw that is longer than the lower 
jaw, while undershot is when the lower jaw is longer. An 
overshot jaw gives an appearance of a parrot mouth and an 
undershot jaw gives an appearance of a sow mouth or mon-
key mouth. The presence of crooked or distorted teeth in the 
oral cavity is called as wry mouth. Normally, a puppy will 
have 28 baby teeth once it is 6 months old. By the time it 
reaches adulthood, most dog breeds will have 42 teeth. In ab-
normal conditions, these teeth will be lesser in number, and 
in severe cases, there may be xerostomia, i.e., the absence 
of any teeth. Manifestations of allergic skin diseases are the 
most frequent disease presentations in clinical practice.

19

Chapter 2
Biological system of dogs and cats 
and its clinical management
1 Introduction
From ancient time dog was the first animal to be domes -
ticated in different places in India. Dogs and cats are con -
sidered companion animals. Dogs are excellent service 
providers for humans. The dog is used to guard houses, dif-
ferent factories/offices, and railway lines, sending the signal 
to the Red Cross society. It detects dangerous drugs, factory 
gas leak, and search dead bodies. Dogs are best friends of 
blind persons and warmen. Sniffer dogs are used to detect 
explosives and trace down criminals. Companion animals 
are providing health benefits to human beings, especially to 
older people. Dogs live in close association with humans, 
providing them with companionship and security, among 
others ( Paul et  al., 2010 ). However, these companion an -
imals can as well transmit diseases to humans who have 
close contact with them (Lappin, 2002). Some diseases like 
rabies, Leptospira, ringworm, etc., are highly contagious 
and may infect human also so the care and management of 
companion animals are very important to keep healthy our 
pets and protect also to human beings. “Prevention is better 
than cure”; therefore, the first and foremost duty of every 
pet owner is to complete all the vaccination schedules as per 
recommendations in the early life of the pet. Ectoparasite 
and the endoparasitic burden should be corrected before 
vaccination. Appropriate vitamins minerals and healthy 
foods are to be provided to the pets to make them healthy. 
Regular cleaning of the dog and cat houses and premises 
should be done with disinfectants. Regular and timely de -
worming, vaccination, and proper hygiene make our pets 
healthy.
Like other mammals, the body of dogs and cats also has 
different organ systems. The anatomy of these two species 
may be described as the following system.
1. Musculoskeletal system
2. Digestive system
3. Respiratory system
4. Reproductive system
5. Urinary system
6. Endocrine system
7. Sense organ
2 Musculoskeletal system of dog 
and cat
The skeleton system of dogs and cats is broadly divided into 
axial and appendicular skeletons. The former comprises 
bones of skull, vertebral column, ribs, and sternum. The ap-
pendicular skeleton consists of bones of fore limb and hind 
limb.
2.1 Skull
Like other mammals, there are two sets of bones in the 
skull. The facial bones are placed in front and cranial bones 
are placed behind in the head region. The cranial bones 
form boundaries of the cranial cavity which lodges the 
brain and essential organ of hearing and the facial bones 
form boundaries of nasal and oral cavities including jaws 
and support larynx and tongue. Skulls differ more in size 
and shape among domestic dogs than in any other mamma-
lian species. Dolichocephalic breeds have long and narrow 
skulls. The Mesaticephalic breeds have medium-type skulls 
while Brachycephalic breeds have short and wide skulls 
with shortened and broadened facial skeletons.
The bones of the skull are the following (Table 1).
Internally, the skull is filled with air space called sinuses. 
The cat has prominent a frontal sinus and a maxillary sinus. 
The maxilla bone of the skull holds the upper teeth and the 
lower teeth are held by the mandible. In dogs, the maxillary 
sinus is a recess and communicates through a large open -
ing with the middle nasal meatus. Frontal sinuses open into 
ethmoidal meatuses. There are no sphenoidal and palatine 
sinuses in these two species.

20 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
The vertebral column is divided into five regions, the 
cervical, thoracic, lumbar, sacral, and caudal or coccygeal 
regions. In the first region, the cervical vertebrae form the 
neck of the animal. The first two cervical vertebrae are 
named the atlas and the axis. There are a total of seven cer-
vical vertebrae in dogs and cats. The thoracic vertebrae are 
13 in number, each vertebra is associated with a pair of ribs, 
the lumbar area has seven vertebrae and ends at the pelvis, 
and three sacral vertebrae in these two species. The coccy -
geal vertebrae are varied from 18 to 23 in number to form 
the tail in cats and 20–23 in dogs. The vertebral formula 
is C 7T13L7S3C18–23 and C 7T13L7S3C20–23 in cats and dogs, 
 respectively. The cat’s vertebral column is very much flexi-
ble as compared to all mammals, due to especially presence 
of elastic cushioning disks between them. A cat can make 
a back arch in a “U” shape. There are 13 pairs of ribs. Each 
rib articulates dorsally with two adjacent thoracic vertebrae 
and is continued ventrally by costal cartilage. Those that 
articulate with the sternum by means of costal cartilage are 
termed sternal (true) ribs (nine pairs). The remainder (four 
pairs) are asternal (false) ribs in dogs and cats. The sternum 
of cat and dog is made up of eight bony segments (sterne -
brae) united by synchondrosis (Fig. 1).
The forelimb bones consisted of the scapula, clavicle, hu-
merus, radius & ulna, carpal, metacarpal, and phalanges or 
digits (Fig. 2). The carpus consists of seven short bones, three 
in the proximal row that is radial, ulnar, and accessory carpal 
bone and four in the distal row. There are five digits. The 3rd 
and 4th digits are the longest. However, the hind limb consisted 
hip bone, femur, patella, tibia & fibula, tarsal, metatarsal, and 
phalanges. It has seven tarsal bones which are arranged in three 
rows, in proximal row tibial and fibular tarsal, in the central 
row central tarsal and in the distal row 1st tarsal, 2nd tarsal, 3rd 
tarsal, and 4th tarsal is present in both dog and cat.
The union of two or more bones by connective tissue 
either tendon or ligaments is called joint. There are so many 
joints in dog and cat bodies like others. Ligaments are 
connective tissue that connect bone to bone. Tendons are 
TABLE 1 Showing the list of facial and cranial bones.
Facial bones Cranial bones
Paired Unpaired Paired Unpaired
Maxilla Hyoid Parietal Occipital
Premaxilla Vomer Temporal Sphenoid
Nasal  Frontal Ethmoid
Pterygoid    
Lacrimal    
Turbinates    
FIG. 1 Skeleton of cat.

Biological system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 2  21
connective tissue that connects bone to muscles. There are 
different types of joints like ball and socket joints which are 
frequently seen in the hip and shoulder joints. They make 
movement in forward, backward, and sideways motions. 
The other types are the hinge type of joints which make it 
able to flexion and move forward and back. The main joints 
of the forelimb are the shoulder, elbow, carpal, fetlock, pas-
tern, and coffin joint. The major joints of the hind limbs are 
the hip, stifle, hock, fetlock, pastern, and coffin joint.
Like other mammals, these two also have three types 
of muscle that is skeletal, cardiac, and smooth muscles. 
Skeletal muscles are involved in voluntary movement and 
they are usually attached to bone. They permit movement, 
breathe, and look around at the dog and cat. These mus -
cles are usually present over the legs, back, chest, and head  
region of the body. Cardiac muscles are involuntary in  
nature and present in the heart. Smooth muscles are present 
in most of the visceral organs (Fig. 3).
3 Digestive system
The digestive system of cats and dogs consisted of an ali -
mentary canal and some accessory structures. An alimen -
tary canal is composed of the mouth, pharynx, tongue, 
esophagus, stomach, small intestine (duodenum, jejunum, 
and ileum), and large intestine (cecum, colon, and rectum). 
FIG. 2 Skeleton of dog.
FIG. 3 Superficial muscles of cat.

22 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
The accessory structures include the teeth, salivary glands, 
liver, and pancreas. All the organs of the digestive system 
are involved in the digestion of food, absorbed the nutrients, 
and eliminated the waste product.
The mouth is concerned with prehension, selection, 
mastication, and insalivation of food. The anterior opening 
of the mouth is bounded by lips. The tongue positions the 
food for shredding and tearing and mixes it with saliva to 
start the breakdown of carbohydrates.
Most of the domestic mammals have two sets of teeth 
deciduous and permanent sets and hence are Diphyodontic. 
Cats have 26 deciduous teeth or milk teeth which fall out 
within 5–7 months of age and are replaced by 30 permanent 
teeth (Tables 2–4).
However, dogs have 28 deciduous teeth or milk teeth 
which fall out within 5–7 months of age and are replaced 
by 42 permanent teeth The canine teeth of cats and dogs are 
very well developed and strong to hold and tear food.
3.1 Salivary glands
The paired major salivary glands of dogs and cats include 
parotid, mandibular, sublingual, malar, and zygomatic sal -
ivary glands, and their ducts open into the mouth. It helps 
to moisten the food as an aid in swallowing and digesting.
3.2 Pharynx
It is a funnel-shaped musculomembranous structure that 
connects the mouth with the esophagus and the nasal cavity 
with the larynx. Food materials enter the pharynx from the 
mouth through the action of the tongue and leave through 
the esophagus. During the act of swallowing, the epiglottis 
closes over the trachea to prevent food from entering it.
3.3 Esophagus
The esophagus is a long musculomembranous tube that car-
ries food from the pharynx to the stomach. It has cervical, 
thoracic, and abdominal parts.
TABLE 3 Showing eruption of teeth and age 
determination in dog.
Eruption age
Tooth Deciduous Permanent
Incisor 1 4–6 weeks 3–5 months
Incisor 2 4–6 weeks 3–5 months
Incisor 3 4–6 weeks 4–5 months
Canines 3–5 weeks 5–7 months
Premolar 1  4–5 months
Premolar 2 5–6 weeks 5–6 months
Premolar 3 5–6 weeks 5–6 months
Premolar 4 5–6 weeks 4–5 months
Molar 1 – 5–6 months
Molar 2 – Upper 5–6 months lower 
4½–5 months
Molar 3 – 6–7 months
TABLE 2 Dental formula of dog and cat.
Deciduous den/g415/g415on
Total 
no. of 
teeth
Permanent den/g415/g415on
Total 
no. of 
teeth
Dog
3         1              3                
2        Di ____ Dc ___     Dp _____
3          1             3     
= 28
3        1          4            2
2     I _____ C ____ P _______  M_____
3        1          4            3
= 42
Cat
3            1             3                
2       Di  _____ Dc  ______Dp_____
3            1             2     
= 26
3         1         3             1
2    I _____ C____ P _______ M _____
3         1         2             1
= 30

Biological system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 2  23
3.4 Stomach
The stomach is a sac-like enlargement of the alimentary 
canal between the esophagus and duodenum. It receives 
boluses from esophagus, temporarily stores and initiates 
enzymatic and chemical digestion by producing gastric 
juices. Near the pylorus, a muscular valve (torus pyloricus) 
is present which facilitates the food materials toward the 
small intestine.
3.5 Small intestine
It is subdivided into duodenum, jejunum, and ileum. The duo-
denum is the initial segment of the small intestine. The small 
intestine is used to secrete some digestive enzymes which help 
in the breakdown of proteins and carbohydrates. Bile and pan-
creatic duct open into the duodenum and release the secretion. 
Along with these substances break down the foods. As these 
substances have broken down the food, they can be absorbed 
into the body and remain passed into the large intestine (Fig. 4).
3.6 Large intestine
The large intestine extends from the termination of the il -
eum to the anus and consists of cecum, colon, and rectum. 
There is little difference between the diameter of the small 
and large intestines of cat. The cecum is comma-shaped in 
the cats. However, in dogs it is irregularly twisted and its 
blind end is bent and often pointed cranially. It opens into 
colon by cecocolic orifice. It helps in the absorption of wa-
ter and salt from the materials that have not been digested 
as food and then pass out the waste products from the body. 
The rectum is the terminal most segment of the large intes-
tine entirely situated within the pelvis region. The anus is 
the muscular closure at the end of the large intestine.
3.7 Liver
It is the largest gland in the body and is located on the right 
side of the abdominal cavity. It is reddish brown in color. In 
well-nourished and younger animals, it is light brown and 
dark reddish brown in emaciated and older animals. The 
liver of the dog is divided into right lateral, right medial, left 
medial, left lateral, quadrate, and caudate lobes by deep in-
terlobar notches which converge toward the root of the liver. 
The right and left lobes are subdivided into right medial, 
right lateral and left lateral, and left medial lobes. Between 
the two medial lobes and ventral to porta is tongue-shaped 
quadrate lobe. The deep renal impression for a right kid -
ney is formed by the caudate process and the right lateral 
lobe. The caudate lobe is dorsal to porta and has a caudate 
process on the right and a papillary process on the left. The 
left medial lobe is prismatic while the left lateral lobe is 
the largest lobe of the liver and is oval in shape. The gall 
bladder lies in the fossa between the quadrate and the right 
medial lobe. The liver helps in the detoxification of toxins. 
It makes useful proteins that aid in blood clotting. It stores 
essential nutrients like vitamins, minerals, fats, and sugars. 
It produced bile to aid in the digestion of fats (Fig. 5).
3.8 Pancreas
In dogs and cats, it is a “U” or “V”-shaped lobulated gland 
located transversely in the dorsal part of the abdominal cav-
ity almost to the right of the median plane. The pancreatic 
ducts are two, the minor duct unites with the bile duct and 
opens into the duodenum about 5–8 cm distal to the pylorus, 
while the larger accessory duct opens into the duodenum 
a few centimeters distal to the opening of the minor duct. 
The pancreas contains the endocrine part called the Islets 
TABLE 4 Showing eruption of teeth and age 
determination in cat.
Eruption age
Tooth Temporary Permanent
Incisor 1 3–4 weeks 3½–5½ months
Incisor 2 3–4 weeks 3½–5½ months
Incisor 3 3–4 weeks 3½–5½ months
Canines 3–4 weeks 5½–6½ months
Premolar 2 5–6 weeks 4–5 months
Premolar 3 5–6 weeks 4–5 months
Premolar 4 5–6 weeks 4–5 months
Molar 1 – 5–6 months
FIG. 4 Showing the digestive tract of dog.

24 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
of Langerhans. It produces insulin that is essential for the 
utilization of blood sugar. Diabetes is a condition in which 
there is a lack of insulin.
4 Respiratory system
The respiratory system of dogs and cats comprises of the 
nose including nostrils and nasal cavity, nasopharynx, lar -
ynx, trachea, principal bronchi, and lungs. It begins at the 
nostrils and ends in the lungs. This system facilitates the 
exchange of gases between the air and the blood. It transfers 
the oxygen from the air to the blood and removes carbon di-
oxide from the blood and exhales out from the body into the 
air. Oxygen is vital for breathing. The cat breathes through 
the nose and mouth. The nose and mouth communicated in 
the posterior part of the oral cavity at the pharynx. The tra -
chea is a tubular structure that extends from the pharynx to 
the lungs. The epiglottis covers the initial part of the trachea 
when swallowing occurs to prevent food and water from 
entering the lungs. In the lungs, the tracheal branches get 
smaller tubules called bronchial tubes. The bronchial tube 
divides into several smaller bronchioles. Then, it becomes 
sacs like structure called alveoli. These alveoli are the  actual 
place of gaseous exchange (Fig. 6).
5 Male reproductive organs of dog 
and cat
The genital system of male dog and tomcat’s (male cat) 
comprises two testicles with their covering (scrotum) and 
epididymis, the ductus deferens which opens into the ure -
thra close to neck of bladder, prostate which open into the 
urethra, and penis with its covering, the prepuce. The tes -
ticle is suspended outside of the body into a sac-like struc -
ture called the scrotum. It is just ventral to the anus and 
largely hidden by dense hair. The testicles are responsible 
FIG. 5 Showing the digestive tract of cat.
FIG. 6 Showing the respiratory organs in cat.

Biological system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 2  25
for secreting male sex hormones, i.e., testosterone, and 
also produce and store sperm. The epididymis helps in the 
transportation of sperm from rete testes to vas deferens. 
Only the prostate gland of dog and cat is well prominent 
which produces seminal fluid, and helps in the transpor -
tation of sperm. The penis of the dog is nearly cylindri -
cal. A bone os penis is present in the glans penis and part 
of the body of the penis. This bone covered with tough 
periosteum shows ventrally except at the tip a groove for 
the lodgment of the urethra and corpus spongiosum. The 
proximal part of os penis is thick and tapers distally. The 
groove is continuous caudally with the urethral groove on 
the ventral surface of corpora cavernosa. The glans penis 
is very long and shows an anterior cylindrical long part, 
pars longa glandis with a pointed free end and surrounding 
slender portion of os penis with a tapered tip and a poste -
rior rounded short globular enlarged part, bulbus glandis 
surrounding thick proximal portion of bone. The bulbus 
glandis because of its elastic trabeculae is capable of con -
siderable distension during coitus and contributes to the 
so-called “tie” between partners lasting up to 30  min. The 
body shows a proximal cavernous part and a distal osseous 
part. The retractor penis extends forward to the bulbous 
glandis. Few bundles may enter the scrotal septum. The 
ischiocavernosus extends from the tuber ischii to the junc -
tion of the crura. The retractor penis originates from the 
sacrum or first two coccygeal vertebrae and ends in the 
region of the bulbous glandis. In cats the penis is short 
and cylindrical. The free part of the penis is conical and 
has small cornified papillae and spines. During mating, 
the tomcat ejaculates seminal fluids into the vagina of the 
female cat. The sperm in the seminal fluid moves through 
the vagina to the uterus and finally reached the oviduct 
(Figs. 7 and 8 ).
FIG. 7 Showing the male reproductive organs in dogs.
FIG. 8 Showing the male urogenital organs of cat.

26 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
6 Female reproductive organs of bitch 
and queen
The female genital system consists of two ovaries, fallopian 
tubes (oviducts), uterus, and copulatory organs (vagina, ves-
tibule, and vulva). In bitch ovaries are small, elongated-oval 
in outline and flattened and the surface is rough and nodular 
or tuberculate because of many corpora lutea (multiparous). 
They are situated a little behind (1–2 cm) the posterior pole 
of the corresponding kidney in the sublumbar region at the 
level of the 3rd to 4th lumbar vertebrae. The uterine end of 
the ovary is attached by a very short proper ligament to the 
tip of the uterine horn. The ovary is attached cranially to the 
diaphragm in the region of the last rib by the suspensory 
ligament. Ovarian bursa, a peritoneal pouch with a slit-like 
ventral opening medially, is present completely around the 
ovary which hides it from view. The mesovarium is continu-
ous cranially with the suspensory ligament. On the lateral 
surface of the ovarian bursa is a round fat-free area through 
which the ovary can usually be seen. The mesosalpinx en -
closes the laterally flattened deep bursa into which the ovary 
projects from the medial wall and the fimbriae of the uterine 
tube can be seen through the narrow entrance of the bursa; 
however, in cats ovarian bursa encloses the ovary only partly. 
The oviduct is a small tubular structure that connects the 
uterus to the ovaries. In both species body of the uterus is 
short (2–3 cm long) and the horns are very long (12–15 cm), 
slender, nearly straight, and lie entirely within the abdominal 
cavity. The horns diverge from the body in the form of a “V” 
from the 6th or 7th lumbar vertebrae toward the vicinity of 
the kidneys. The horns are of uniform diameter and extend 
with a slight convexity from the uterine end of the ovary 
to body of the uterus. The mucosa shows low longitudinal 
folds. A cervix is an opening between the vagina and the 
uterus. At the time of birth, the cervix becomes relaxed and 
allows the kitten to come out from the uterus to the vagina. 
The vagina is a tubular structure just inside the vulva. The 
vulva is the external part of the female reproductive tract. 
The vulvar lips are located just below the anus. The vulva is 
covered with dense hair in the cat (Fig. 9).
7 Mammary glands
Mammary glands are characteristic of mammals and pro -
duce milk. In bitch, usually, 10 glands are present in two 
series from the posterior part of the pectoral region to the in-
guinal region. The teats are short and have 6–12 teat canals. 
In cats generally, four pairs of mammary glands are present.
8 Urinary system
The urinary system consists of paired kidneys, renal pelvis, 
ureters and unpaired urinary bladder, and urethra which is 
pelvic and extra pelvic parts in males and only pelvic part 
in females. The kidneys of dogs are smooth, unipyramidal, 
bean-shaped, and thick. The dorsal surface is rounded while 
the ventral surface is less convex. The perirenal fat is less 
developed. They have a dark brownish red or bluish-red 
color. The left kidney is less firmly fixed than the right and 
related laterally to the spleen and abdominal wall and ven -
tromedially to descending colon. The right kidney cranially 
lies in the renal impression of the liver and is ventrally re -
lated to descending duodenum, pancreas, and ascending co-
lon. Both kidneys may be palpated through the abdominal 
wall. The renal pelvis and renal crest are present. The renal 
pelvis is an elongated cavity which projects the renal crest. 
There are no calyces minor and major. The hilus is about 
the middle of the medial border. The right kidney is located 
under the bodies of the first three lumbar vertebrae, while 
the left kidney is located under the 2nd, 3rd, and 4th lumbar 
vertebrae. The left kidney is related to the spleen also. In 
cats, both kidneys are smooth and bean-shaped structures. 
The right kidney lies ventral to the first to 4th lumbar trans-
verse processes and the left lies ventral to the 2nd to 5th 
transverse process of lumbar vertebrae. The characteristic 
capsular veins lie in shallow grooves which radiate from the 
hilus. Kidneys involve in the filtration of blood and liquid 
waste product passed as urine. Blood is filtered through the 
kidneys and the liquid waste product is called urine. Urine 
is passed through the ureters into the bladder, and then, it is 
discharged through the urethra, a tube connecting the blad-
der to the exterior of the body.
9 Endocrine system
Dogs and cats have two thyroid glands which are situated 
on the ventrolateral aspect of the trachea, spanning the ini -
tial five to eight tracheal rings. In dogs, thyroid gland size 
FIG. 9 Showing the female reproductive organs in dog.

Biological system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 2  27
varies with breed and individual body size. In an adult 
 medium-size breed, the thyroid gland is approximately 
5 cm in length, 1.5 cm in width, and 0.5 cm in thickness. The 
cranial pole of the right cranial gland is at the level of the 
caudal border of the cricoid cartilage of the larynx, and the 
caudal pole extends to the fifth tracheal ring. The left gland 
is slightly more caudal, extending from the third through the 
eighth tracheal rings. In some dogs, there is a narrow com -
munication between the two glands. This bridge, composed 
of glandular parenchyma, called isthmus glandularis, passes 
across the trachea ventrally. In cats, the thyroid glands are 
flat and measure 10  mm long, 3–5  mm wide, and 1–2  mm 
thick. The parathyroid glands are small and four in number 
in dogs. Two are situated on the deep face of the thyroid 
lobes, the others are placed laterally near the anterior ex -
tremity of the thyroid lobes.
Adrenal glands are two in number and red-brown in 
color. A section of the gland reveals an outer cortex and an 
inner medulla. The cortex is yellowish and radially striated 
and the medulla is much darker and has a uniform appear -
ance. Dogs right adrenal is prismatic and pointed at either 
end while the left adrenal is elongated and flattened dor -
soventrally. The left adrenal is not in contact with the left 
kidney. The glands produce two important hormones that 
regulate a variety of body functions and are necessary to 
sustain life.
The pituitary gland is circular or ellipsoidal in outline 
and consists of adenohypophysis and neurohypophysis. It 
is situated in the hypophyseal fossa on the internal face of 
the body of post-sphenoid and connected by a hollow tube 
of gray matter called infundibulum to the tuber cinereum, 
a small gray prominence situated between optic chiasm in 
front and mammillary body behind.
The pineal gland of a dog is a small elongate lancet-
shaped organ darkly pigmented gland situated dorsally 
in the deep depression between the thalami and the cor -
pora quadrigemina of the brain. It is attached to the pos -
terosuperior quadrant of the III ventricle by a short stalk 
which is a small recess of the third ventricle, epiphyseal 
recess.
10 Sense organ
The eye is an organ of vision located in orbit and made up 
of eyeball and accessory structures including eyelids, con -
junctiva, eyeball muscles, and lacrimal apparatus ( Gelatt, 
2018). The transparent covering of eyeball is known as 
the cornea. Around the cornea, there is a ring of white, 
tissue called the sclera. The iris is a colored, circular area 
of the eyeball. It controls the amount of light that enters 
the eye by making the pupil larger or smaller. The pupil 
is the black area in the center of the eyeball. The pupil is 
controlled by the circular sphincter muscle. In a dark en -
vironment, the pupil becomes enlarges to let in more light, 
and in a bright environment, the pupil becomes smaller to 
let in less light ( Fig. 10).
The lens is situated behind the iris in the fossa hya -
loidea of vitreous humor. The lens consisted of strong, 
crystal-like fibrous tissue. The ciliary muscles of the eye -
ball contract to cause the lens to become thicker, which 
allows the lens to focus on nearby objects. In cats, these 
lens changes appear limited. The ciliary muscles relax to 
cause the lens to become thinner when it focuses on dis -
tant objects. The light rays passing through the lens are 
bent to rest on a very sensitive area on the back of the eye, 
the retina. It is richly lined with nerves. The nerves in the 
retina receive light and change it into nerve impulses or 
signals. Impulses are transmitted to the brain by way of 
the optic nerve. The brain interprets these impulses and 
the cats are able to see. All eyes reflect light, but some 
eyes have a special reflective structure called tapetum 
lucidum that creates the appearance of glowing at night 
(Fig. 11).
The eyes of a cat are very delicate organs that have ex -
ceptional eyesight. In the early evening and at night, they 
see better than human beings. Most of the cats can see kinds 
of light, such as ultraviolet, that are invisible to some other 
mammals. The glowings of cats eyes is due to presence of 
tapetum lucidum which is a layer of iridescent cells at the 
back of eye ball reflect the light, that enhance the ability to 
see at night ( Foss, 2008). The ability to see at night while 
hunting was more favored than the ability to see colors dur-
ing the day.
10.1 Ear
The ear shows three parts external, middle, and internal 
ears. The external ear is composed of the pinna and exter -
nal acoustic meatus. The middle ear comprises the tym -
panic cavity and its contents and the Eustachian tubes. 
Ear ossicles, i.e., malleus, incus, and stapes, extend from 
the lateral to the medial wall of the tympanic cavity. The 
FIG. 10 Showing the front view of eye ball of cat.

28 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
internal ear consists cochlea. When a cat listens to any 
sound, it will move its head toward the sound and turn 
its ears in that direction. The sound travels down through 
the outer ear canal and reached toward the eardrum. 
Through the ear ossicles, sound waves enter the internal 
ear (Fig. 12).
The cochlea is a snail-shaped tubular structure that 
contains the auditory nerve which changes sound waves 
to nerve impulses and relays sound messages to the brain. 
Near the cochlea are three horseshoe-shaped tubes known 
as the semicircular canals (Getty, 1975). They contain fluid 
and fine hairs called cilia that function to maintain the cat’s 
excellent sense of balance (Fig. 13).
10.2 Clinical importance of surface anatomy
● Femoral artery is used to take the pulse in dogs and cats.
● In dog and cat, cephalic vein and recurrent tarsal vein 
are used for intravenous injection, blood collection, and 
transfusion of blood.
● Iliac crest is the most convenient site for the collection 
of bone marrow in dogs; however, in cats proximal end 
of the femur through the trochanteric fossa is the best 
site.
● Suboccipital site (puncture of cisterna magna) is the 
most preferred site for cerebrospinal fluid collection in 
dogs and cats.
FIG. 12 Showing the external and middle ear of cat.
FIG. 11 Showing the transverse section of eyeball of cat.

Biological system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 2  29
11 Common disorders of dog and its 
clinical management
Canine distemper: Canine distemper is a contagious and 
serious disease caused by a virus that attacks the respira -
tory, gastrointestinal, and nervous systems of puppies 
and dogs. All dogs are at risk but puppies younger than 
4 months old and dogs that have not been vaccinated against 
canine distemper are at increased risk of acquiring the dis -
ease. Initially, infected dogs will develop watery to pus-like 
discharge from their eyes. They then develop fever, nasal 
discharge, coughing, lethargy, reduced appetite, and vomit-
ing. As the virus attacks the nervous system, infected dogs 
develop circling behavior, head tilt, muscle twitches, con -
vulsions with jaw chewing movements and salivation, sei -
zures, and partial or complete paralysis. The virus may also 
cause the footpads and nose to thicken and harden due to 
hyperkeratosis leading to its nickname “hard pad disease” 
(Appel and Gillespie, 1972a, b ). Distemper is often fatal, 
and dogs that survive usually have permanent, irreparable 
nervous system damage.
Vaccination is crucial in preventing canine distemper. A 
series of vaccinations are administered to puppies to increase 
the likelihood of building immunity when the immune sys-
tem has not yet fully matured. Avoid gaps in the immuniza-
tion schedule and make sure distemper vaccinations are up 
to date. Avoid contact with infected animals and wildlife. 
Use caution when socializing puppies or unvaccinated dogs 
at parks, puppy classes, obedience classes, doggy daycare, 
and other places where dogs can congregate.
Hepatitis: It is an acute contagious viral disease of 
dogs caused by a DNA-containing virus that belongs to the 
 adenovirus group (Appel et al., 1973 ). The viruses present 
in the saliva, urine, and feces in acute illness and may ex -
crete in the urine for a prolonged period after clinical re -
covery. The disease occurs in any age group of dogs and is 
characterized by fever, vomition, diarrhea, and convulsion. 
After 1–3  weeks following the disappearance of clinical 
signs, a transient corneal opacity may develop due to irido-
cyclitis and corneal edema known as “Hepatitis Blue Eye.”
Symptomatic treatment may recommend. Broad-
spectrum antibodies may be given to control secondary 
bacterial infection and fluid therapy is also recommended. 
A combined vaccine made against distemper may be used 
to prevent this disease.
Leptospirosis: Leptospirosis is a disease caused by in -
fection with Leptospira (Spirochete) bacteria. Transmitted 
by contact with the urine of an infected dog. Symptoms of 
leptospirosis may include fever, shivering, muscle tender -
ness, reluctance to move, increased thirst, changes in the 
frequency or amount of urination, dehydration, vomiting, 
diarrhea, loss of appetite, lethargy, jaundice (yellowing 
of the skin and mucous membranes), or painful inflam -
mation within the eyes, kidney and liver failure. The dis -
ease can cause kidney failure with or without liver failure. 
Leptospirosis can cause bleeding disorders, which can lead 
to blood-tinged vomit, urine, stool, or saliva; nosebleeds; and 
pinpoint red spots (which may be visible on the gums and 
other mucous membranes or light-colored skin). Affected 
dogs can also develop swollen legs (from fluid accumula -
tion) or accumulate excess fluid in their chest or abdomen.
Leptospirosis is generally treated with antibiotics and 
supportive therapy. Avoid contact with the dog’s urine. When 
treated early and aggressively, the chances for recovery are 
FIG. 13 Showing the internal ear of dog.

30 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
good but there is still a risk of permanent residual kidney or 
liver damage. Currently, available vaccines effectively pre-
vent leptospirosis and protect dogs for at least 12 months. 
Annual vaccination is recommended for at-risk dogs.
Kennel cough:  Kennel cough is also known as in -
fectious tracheobronchitis. It is caused by Bordetella 
 bronchiseptica or a combination of viruses and bacteria. It 
is a highly contagious disease of dogs. Dogs that are in close 
contact with infected dogs from veterinary hospitals, stray 
dogs, boarding houses pet stores, and kennels are at higher 
risk of contracting the disease. Most commonly, dogs with 
kennel cough will have a snotty nose and a harsh and dry, 
hacking cough, lethargy, and anorexia. There are vaccines 
for kennel cough, but not all dogs need to receive the vac -
cine. Antibiotics and a 2% solution of hexidine may be used 
to control the epizootic of kennel cough.
Parvovirus infection: Canine parvovirus is a highly con-
tagious viral disease in dogs that causes acute gastrointesti-
nal illness in puppies of age group 6 months to 20 weeks, 
but older dogs sometimes may infect. Breeds at high risk 
are Dobermans, pinschers, Labrador, retrievers, American 
Stafford Shreterrians, and German Shepherds. The virus 
that causes the disease is known as Canine Parvovirus type 
2 (CPV-2). Affected puppies show symptoms like loss of ap-
petite, depression, and lethargy followed by sudden onset of 
high fever, vomiting restlessness. Animals then pass brown-
ish semisolid feces admixed with excess mucus followed by 
fowtidhemorrhagic/bloody diarrhea (Tiwari and Rao, 1987).
Clinical management:  Restoration of fluid and elec -
trolyte balance, preventing secondary bacterial infections, 
fluid therapy should be continued for as long as vomiting 
or diarrhea (or both) persists. A combination of penicillin 
and aminoglycoside (use cautiously) for the best antibacte-
rial spectrum. Antiemetics (Metoclopramide hydrochloride 
and prochlorperazine) have proved helpful in most dogs 
with persistent vomiting. CPV can be inactivated by bleach, 
cleaning with a solution of (1 part bleach mixed with 30 
parts of water) for disinfecting indoor areas like bedding 
food water bowls, etc. Administer the CPV vaccine in com-
bination with other vaccines-distemper, canine adenovirus, 
and parainfluenza vaccines.
Corona: Canine coronavirus is a highly contagious viral 
disease of puppies and older dogs. It causes gastroenteritis 
cause diarrhea similar to parvo but unlike parvovirus vomit-
ing is not common. Kennel environments and dog shows 
may lead to outbreaks of coronavirus. Fluid therapy, antibi-
otics, and supportive drugs are recommended.
Rabies: Dangerous as well as zoonotic viral disease of 
dogs that affects the brain and spinal cord. It is caused by the 
SSRNA Lyssavirus of the Rhabdoviridae family. The  virus 
spreads from the brain to the salivary glands where viral 
particles are able to be shed in the saliva and transmit the 
disease. The rabies virus may remain alive on the dog’s skin 
for up to 2 h. Symptoms appear in two forms: Furious form 
(Hyperactivity)—lasts from 1 to 7 days and exhibits changes 
in behavior like irritability, aggression restlessness, vicious, 
loss of appetite, hiding in dark places, eating unusual ob -
jects, fever attacking other animals and inanimate objects. 
Dumb form (Paralysis): in this form, a rabid dog has trouble 
walking moving keeps stumbling, and is finally struck by 
paralysis, resulting in death. The ability to swallow, drink, 
and speak is lost. It is because of these characteristic symp-
toms that animals often “foam at the mouth.” Exhibit hydro-
phobia. Rabid animals may also exhibit aggressive behavior. 
This makes them more likely to bite other animals allowing 
infection to spread. Once the onset of symptoms has begun 
the animal usually dies within ten days. Once symptoms ap-
pear, Rabies is close to almost 100% fatal.
Vaccination is the key element for preventing the disease. 
To prevent the disease spread rabid dogs are euthanized. A dog 
is considered immunized for 3 years after a single vaccination 
(Lakshmanan et al., 2006; Moore et al., 2015). If a booster 
dose is administered before the end of the 3 years, the vaccina-
tion episode is extended for 3 more years after the booster. If 
the booster is administered more than 3 years after the initial 
vaccination, a second vaccination episode is created.
12 Common endoparasitic infestation  
in dogs and cats
Internal parasites: Common endoparasites of dogs are 
intestinal parasites such as roundworms, hookworms, 
whipworms, and tapeworms lay eggs that are passed in 
the dog’s stool and infect other dogs when they eat con -
taminated soil, licking contaminated fur or paws, or drink 
water contaminated with the stool from infected dogs. 
Gastrointestinal parasites are more common in dogs in  
developing countries ( Perera et  al., 2013 ). Tapeworms 
are spread when dogs eat fleas, lice, or rodents infected 
with tapeworms. These worms can cause malnutrition and  
diarrhea, and hookworms can cause blood loss. Some kidney 
worms like Capillaria (Bladder worm), Ditophyma (Kidney 
worm) cause cystitis, painful urine, red urine, and hydrone-
phrosis. In cats similar to dogs, most common endoparasites 
are intestinal parasites such as roundworms, hookworms, and 
tapeworms. There are many products available to treat worms, 
and consult a veterinarian for the appropriate advice for pets.
Heartworm spread by mosquitoes damages an in -
fected dog’s pulmonary arteries, veins, muscles, and tis -
sue of the heart leading to congestive heart failure and 
death. Cats are atypical host for heartworms and it spread 
by infected mosquitoes. Outdoor cats are at greater risk 
because of increased exposure to mosquitoes. Despite its 
name, heartworm mainly causes lung disease in cats and 
causes life- threatening in kittens and older cats. It causes 
breathing difficulties and persistent cough and it is called 
 “heartworm-associated respiratory disease” (HARD).
Coccidia and Giardia are single-celled parasites that 
damage the lining of the intestine. Dogs can become in -
fected with coccidia by eating infected soil or licking

Biological system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 2  31
 contaminated paws or fur. Puppies are at the highest risk of 
infection and illness.
To control the endoparasitic infestations, periodic anti -
helmintic treatment (deworming) is to be rendered. Dog and 
cat houses should be kept to dry and clean and a hygienic 
environment has to be provided.
External parasites:  Includes ticks, mites, lice, flies, 
and fleas.
Ear mites in dog: Ear mites are microscopic, parasitic 
organisms that cause ear infections in dogs. They thrive in 
warm and moist areas of ear canals and feed on ear wax 
and epidermal debris. Dogs with long floppy ears are more 
prone to ear mites than others. Infected dogs will show 
intense irritation, continuously shaking of head, exces -
sive shaking causes damage to small blood vessels leads 
to hematomas, severe pain in the ear, foul odor from ears, 
an increase in ear wax production, restless behavior, per -
sistent itching and scratching if left untreated may cause 
deafness.
Mange infections in dogs are commonly two types sar -
coptic and demodectic mange.
Scabiasis (Sarcoptic Mange):  Canine scabies is a 
highly contagious zoonotic skin disease in dogs. It is caused 
by Sarcoptes Scabiei. Female mite forms a tunnel on the 
epidermal layer of skin and causes intense itching and rub -
bing of affected parts. Lesions are observed on the lateral of 
hock, elbow, margin of the ear, and root of the tail. Chronic 
cases show thickening, drying, and wrinkling of the skin, 
and secondary pyoderma may develop.
Various scabicidal, antihistaminic, and antibiotic drugs 
as well as tropical antiseptic preparations are used for symp-
tomatic relief. Cleansing with anti-seborrheal shampoo is 
used before miticidal treatment.
Demodicosis (Demodectic Mange): Demodicosis is one 
of the persistent challenging skin problems in a dog caused 
by Demodexcanis. It causes alopecia, erythema, edema, and 
seborrhea and later on develops pyoderma. Dogs produce 
rancid odor from their body if secondary bacterial infection 
occurs. Various miticidal agents like benzyl benzoate, ben-
zoyl peroxide, and ivermectin injections are used to control 
the disease. Antibiotic therapy and supportive therapy may 
also be given to combat secondary bacterial infections.
13 Common disorders of cat and its 
clinical management
Feline leukopenia/Feline distemper: This is a highly conta-
gious disease of cats. The disease is caused by a DNA virus. 
The disease is characterized by fever, anorexia, depression, 
dehydration, and a high fatality rate. There is frequent vomi-
tion and diarrhea result in severe dehydration. Animals may 
stop eating and prefer to remain in a sitting position with the 
head resting in between the stretched forelimb.
There is no specific treatment for the disease. Affected 
animals should be isolated and treated. The course of 
 broad-spectrum antibiotics may be used to prevent second-
ary bacterial infections. Strict sanitation and hygienic mea-
sures are to be adopted. Vaccination may be recommended.
Rabies: Rabies is an acute viral infection of the nervous 
system that affects mainly carnivores including cats. No cat-
to-cat transmission has been recorded. The most common 
way for a cat to become infected is through a bite from an in-
fected animal where the virus is transmitted by saliva. Rabies 
in cats are usually more furious in form than dogs. The first 
signs are changes in behavior like irritability, nervousness, 
and hyperexcitability. Loss of appetite, seizures, drooling, 
foaming at the mouth, and difficulty in swallowing.
There is no treatment for rabies in cats, and humane 
euthanasia is recommended if the disease is strongly sus -
pected. The rabies vaccine can prevent rabies infection. 
Additionally, immediate disinfection of bite wounds may 
help in the decrease in infection.
Take the cat to keep healthy and prevent infectious dis -
eases; care must be taken under the supervision of veteri -
narians and management practices like cleaning up urine 
poop or vomit in the house and disinfecting the area.
Protection of cat from ticks:  Ticks in the cat are very 
common in areas like under the front legs, between back 
legs, toes around eyelids, tails, and ears. To further reduce 
the chances that a tick bite will make a cat sick check the cat 
for ticks every day.
Prevention and control strategies are opted to prevent 
infection, to protect dogs and cats, personnel (owners, han-
dlers, trainers, staff), and the community.
● Early identification and isolation of potentially infec -
tious dogs and cats from other pets in the group.
● Using effective cleaning and disinfection practices for 
all indoor and outdoor pet areas and prompt removal of 
feces and debris, cleaning with detergent and water, and 
correct use of disinfectants.
● Practicing hand hygiene (washing hands with alcohol-
based sanitizer, soap, and water) by all people after han-
dling the pets. Proper cleaning and disinfection result in 
a cleaner, healthier environment and help to prevent the 
spread of disease to both animals and people.
● To reduce contamination, ectoparasites and other patho-
gens on hair coats owners should bathe dogs with a rou-
tine pet shampoo.
● Effective topical or oral flea and tick prevention prod -
ucts should be used prior to and during all events based 
on season, weather, and geography to reduce the risk of 
canine disease transmission.
● To ensure all dogs and cats receive the appropriate core 
vaccination and parasite preventives at the frequency 
recommended for pets.
Deworming schedule for canines:  Worms are one of 
the most common ailments of puppies and kittens, among 
them hookworms, roundworms, whipworms, and tape -
worms are most common. Most worm infestations cause

32 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
symptoms like diarrhea, weight loss or poor growth, dry 
hair, poor appearance, and vomiting. It is also impor -
tant to treat dogs for fleas because fleas are a vector for 
tapeworms.
Puppies: Every 2 weeks until 3 months of age. Once a 
month from 3 to 6 months of age. After 6 months, follow the 
adult recommendation.
Kittens: Every 2 weeks until 3 months of age, starting 
at 3 weeks of age. Once a month from 3 to 6 months of age. 
After 6 months, follow the adult recommendation.
Adult pets: For all dogs and cats—twice a year for life.
Inside cats—once a year and outside cats—up to three 
times a year.
New animals: Deworm immediately repeat in 2 weeks.
Vaccination:  Vaccination can help to protect the 
cat from dangerous diseases like feline leukemia, ra -
bies, and feline distemper and help them live a longer 
healthier life. Diseases like rabies are transmissible 
to both humans and other animals through a bite from 
 rabid  animals. So  vaccination is necessary to prevent the 
transmission of diseases zoonotic diseases also.
14 Vaccination schedule: Dogs and 
puppies
Core vaccines in dogs protect against Canine distemper 
virus, Canine adenovirus (1&2), Canine parvovirus-2, and 
rabies virus. Noncore vaccines (optional) protect against  
canine influenza (Table 5).
15 Feline vaccination schedule
Core vaccines protect against feline parvovirus (FPV), 
feline herpesvirus-1 (FHV-1), feline calicivirus (FCV), 
and rabies virus. Noncore vaccines (optional) protect 
against Feline leukemia (FeLV) and Chlamydia felis  
(Table 6).
TABLE 5 Vaccination schedule in dog and puppies.
Sl. no. Disease Primary vaccination Booster Subsequent dose
1. Canine Combo
Distemper, Adenovirus-1&2, 
Parvovirus, Leptospira & Parainfluenza
At 6–8 weeks then every 
3–4 weeks until 16 weeks old
1 year after primary 
series
Every 3 years
2. Rabies At 4 months 1 year after first dose Every 3 years
3. Bordetella 18 weeks then 20 weeks – Yearly
4. Heartworm preventive vaccine 9–11 weeks – Yearly
TABLE 6 Vaccination schedule in cats.
Sl. no. Disease Primary vaccination Booster Subsequent dose
1. Feline viral 
rhinotracheitis
At 6–8 weeks then every 3–4 weeks 
until 16 weeks old
1 year after primary series Every 3 years
2. Calicivirus At 6–8 weeks then every 3–4 weeks 
until 16 weeks old
1 year after primary series Every 3 years
3. Panleukopenia At 6–8 weeks then every 3–4 weeks 
until 16 weeks old
1 year after primary series Every 3 years
4. Rabies (killed virus) At 4 months 1 year after first dose Every 3 years
5. Feline leukemia virus At 3–4 weeks apart, at 12 weeks or 
older
– Yearly

Biological system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 2  33

35

Chapter 3
Nutritional strategies of dogs and cats
1 What is nutritionally balanced  
dog food?
A nutritionally balanced and complete food includes carbo-
hydrates, proteins, fats, minerals, vitamins, and water. This is 
generally present in the basic ingredients but has to understand 
how much of each nutrient is used in a dog’s body, under -
stand the processes, and know how much of each nutrient is 
required for a healthy dog at all life stages is very composite.
Generally, that process is so multifaceted that an entire 
specialty in veterinary medicine is devoted to small animal 
nutrition. But as a pet owner, the main things to know about 
dog food nutrition are. The owner has to keep in mind that 
pet food labels  are different from human food product la -
bels, which makes comparing food products difficult.
There are eight things that should be labeled on the dog 
food bag or can:
1. Brand and product name
2. Guaranteed analysis. This lists the percentage or volume 
of each of the nutrients in the food. It must be written in 
a particular order, in specified units, and as a minimum 
or maximum, depending on the nutrient.
3. Ingredient statement
4. Name of species for which the pet food is intended
5. Quality statement
6. Feeding directions
7. Nutritional adequacy which “indicates that the food is 
complete and balanced for a particular life stage, like as 
reproduction, growth, adult maintenance or a combina -
tion of these, or intended for intermittent or supplemen-
tal feeding only.”
8. Name with the address of manufacturer or distributor
Six essential nutrients that are required to support life 
and function in dogs are shown in Fig. 1.
1.1 Balanced dog food should meet your dog’s 
energy requirements
Depending on many factors, the energy requirements for 
dogs can vary. It is essential to meet your dog’s exact energy 
requirement to maintain their daily lifestyle. Some factors 
include:
● Adult age groups (young, middle, and older)
● Reproduction (intact vs altered)
● Growth
● Medical and behavioral conditions
● Activity level
● Breed
The requirement of energy in the diet mainly comes 
from fats and proteins, followed by carbohydrates. The 
energy content of a diet indicates the quality of the food 
and how much food should be consumed per day ba -
sis. The diet should meet the daily energy requirements 
of the individual dog. Nutrient requirement in dogs is 
shown in Fig. 2 .
All the nutrients should be balanced to make sure 
that they are absorbed suitably by the body and appro -
priately used by every body system. If the diet does not 
supply enough energy, the dog’s gastrointestinal tract 
will practically be unable to take enough of that diet re -
sulting in the required nutrient they will not be able to 
get. For example, a small volume of diet is consumed by 
dogs when the percentage of other essential nutrients is 
high enough to meet the requirement that is very impor -
tant to ensure.
The only way to decide if a diet has sufficient energy 
is to undergo a feeding study to ensure that the ingredients 
are enough to maintain a healthy daily life. Energy require-
ments per day in dogs are shown in Fig. 3.

36 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
2 Protein in dog food
Proteins are also important in the maintenance and forma -
tion of tendons, cartilage, and ligaments. Protein in dog food 
also helps the formation of nails, skin, muscles, blood, and 
hair formation. Broken down of protein creates amino acids 
which are essential nutrients for dogs. Amino acids help to 
create energy for sustaining the life of dogs. To maintain a 
healthy life in dogs, 10 essential amino acids are required. 
These nutrients must be supplied in the diet because they 
cannot be created within the body.
2.1 Sources of protein in dog food
Animal protein contains the highest amounts of essential 
amino acids. Plant protein tends to have a lower digestibility 
since dogs cannot digest plant fiber as simply as other sources. 
In theory, dogs can survive on a completely plant-based pro-
tein diet but such a diet may be required various sources of 
protein to reach a daily minimum that can safely be absorbed. 
It is very important to certify veterinary nutritionists that veg-
etarian diets have undergone food trials and are formulated.
For that reason, have a biyearly nutritional recheck to 
ascertain that the dog is in good health condition. These 
rechecks consist of an ideal body weight review, physical 
examination, blood and gastrointestinal absorption testing, 
and body condition scoring.
2.2 What does crude protein mean?
Crude includes all the ways that protein is calculated and de-
termined in the diet. It does not provide information about the 
protein quality or the nutritional value of the protein source 
in the dog’s diet. Among the many methods, biological value 
(BV) is used to determine protein quality. It measures the 
mass of nitrogen integrated into the body divided by the mass 
of nitrogen from protein in the food multiplied by 100.
A value of 100% means all of the dietary protein eaten 
and absorbed becomes protein in the body.
2.2.1 Protein quality
How much of the protein source is converted into essential 
amino acids that can be used by the body’s tissue treated as 
protein quality. It is dependent on the:
● Number of amino acids in the food
● Availability
● Protein source
Proteins that provide large portions of all essential 
amino acids are considered high-quality proteins. If that 
protein source is lacking essential amino acids (AA) or they 
cannot be absorbed by the body, then it is considered a low-
quality protein. In many cases, to avoid this, multiple pro -
tein sources may be fed in one diet to prevent the absence of 
certain amino acids.
2.3 How much protein does my dog need?
Dog protein requirement depends on the stage of life and 
activity of dogs. Puppies need more protein than adult dogs.  
FIG. 3 Energy requirements per day in dogs.
FIG. 2 Nutrient requirement in dogs.
FIG. 1 Nutritional requirements in dogs.

Nutritional strategies of dogs and cats  Chapter | 3  37
The protein needs of a puppy can be met by high-quality pro-
tein providing 20% to 25% of dietary calories. The minimum 
dietary protein requirement for a growing dog is 18% dry mat-
ter (DM) and 8% DM for an adult dog. This is based on feed-
ing a high-quality protein and again, is a minimum amount. 
Daily requirements for dog diets should contain at least 20%–
24% DM for growth and 17%–19% DM for maintenance.
Current research indicates that there is no added benefit 
to excess protein in the diet. The maximum amount for any 
life stage should not exceed 29%–31% DM. Excess protein 
is otherwise excreted from the body, and in some condi -
tions, it can be harmful to the body.
2.3.1 Low-protein diets
In veterinary nutrition, feeding a low-protein or high-protein 
diet for the prevention and management of certain diseases 
is a debated topic. Low-protein diets may be suggested for 
certain conditions to reduce the amount of ammonia that is 
present in the body. Ammonia is toxic to the cell as well as 
tissue also and is created as a byproduct of protein break -
down. Ammonia occurs in many sites in the body, but 90% 
of that is in the liver and kidneys. Reducing nonessential 
amino acids and total protein intake can help to minimize 
the workload on these organs. It is best to consult with a cer-
tified veterinary nutritionist if considering a protein-specific 
diet due to the dog’s condition.
2.4 Can dogs be allergic to certain proteins?
Food allergies in dogs are uncommon and are determined 
after ruling out environmental and seasonal allergies. About 
85% of itchy dogs have an allergy to insect bites (the con -
dition may be called flea allergy dermatitis , or FAD) that 
causes a mild-to-severe immune response that can mimic 
other conditions. Typically, dogs that present with skin and 
ear issues have a higher chance of having environmental 
or seasonal allergies. Common skin allergies can often be 
managed by therapies such as:
● Monthly parasite preventatives and repellants
● Supplements
● Canine-specific allergy medications
If concerned about the dog having a potential food al -
lergy or food aversion, speak with a primary care veteri -
narian or a board-certified veterinary nutritionist about a 
clinical food trial.
2.5 Taurine in cats
Taurine is the eleventh essential AA required by cat. All other 
species conjugate glycine with bile acids to form glycocholic 
acid. Cats use taurine instead of glycine and form taurocho-
lic acid. Taurine is found in muscles, retina, and CNS which 
again makes cats as an obligate carnivore (Fig. 4).
3 Fat in dog food
Fats are concentrated forms of energy. Fats are composed of 
triglycerides and are solid at normal temperatures. Dietary 
fats are the most concentrated form of energy in pet foods 
(contain 2.25 times more calories than carbohydrates or 
proteins). Fat digestion is more complex than that of protein 
or carbohydrates. Healthy dogs & cats can digest fats with 
great efficiency, approximately 90%–95%. Fat helps with 
the absorption of fat-soluble vitamins and also provides en-
ergy. Fat provides essential fatty acids (EFAs). This is es -
sential for dogs to maintain healthy skin and haircoat and 
also helps with inflammation at the cellular level. There are 
two important polyunsaturated fatty acids—omega-3 and 
omega-6 fatty acids. Animals fed diets too low in fat may 
develop dry, coarse hair, dry & thickened skin, decrease 
FIG. 4 Nutrient requirement in cats.

38 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
wound healing and they may boost up certain dermatologi-
cal conditions. High-fat diets may increase the risk of fat -
ness and also want to increase vitamin E supplementation 
though it is involved in antioxidant protection. Fat also con-
tributes to the palatability.
The requirement of fat for absorption of fat-soluble vi -
tamins is 1%–2% of the food. Cats are having limited activ-
ity of the desaturase enzyme involved in EFA’s metabolism. 
Arachidonic acid is dietary essential for cats; therefore, they 
require animal fat and because of the above-given reason, 
the cats are obligate carnivores.
3.1 Sources of fat in dog and cat food
Essential fatty acids support dog’s health. Healthy dogs & 
cats can digest fats with great efficiency, approximately 90%–
95%. Fat supplies essential fatty acid linoleic acid. Linoleic 
acid (LA) is the precursor of arachidonic acid (AA), which 
is an essential omega-6 fatty acid. Vegetable oils, chicken, 
and pork fat are good sources of linoleic acid. Omega-3 fatty 
acids, eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA), and docosahexaenoic 
acid (DHA) may or may not be essential in a dog’s daily 
diet. Veterinarian generally recommends omega-3 fatty ac-
ids which help to reduce inflammation caused by conditions 
like arthritis, burns, certain cancers, inflammatory bowel 
disease, and dermatitis, and kidney disease. Omega-3 is also 
keeping cartilage functional and healthy. Canola, marine fish 
oils, and flaxseed are good sources of omega-3 fatty acids.
4 Carbohydrates in dog food
One of the most important reasons for carbohydrates in a 
dog’s diet is to supply energy. Carbohydrates are sugars, 
starches, and dietary fibers (not completely digestible). The 
body craves glucose, and if it is not available with carbohy-
drates, then it will take amino acids away from other pro -
cesses in the body. Supplied in the diet by cereal grains and 
sugars, such as glucose, sucrose, and lactose ( De Godoy 
et al., 2013) When consuming more carbohydrates than are 
needed, excess carbohydrate energy is stored in the form 
of glycogen in the liver and muscles and is converted to fat 
and stored in adipose tissues. Carbohydrates generate heat 
in the body and form the base for other nutrients. It can be 
converted into fat (some carbohydrates).
Growing animals and dogs require high energy, and 
need to feed a diet with at least 20% carbohydrates. During 
fasting, stress, or exercise, glycogen is broken down into 
glucose and delivered to the bloodstream where it is distrib-
uted to all body tissues.
4.1 Fiber from carbohydrates
Fiber is a form of carbohydrate, that has numerous effects on 
the gastrointestinal tract for its normal function and health. It 
keeps the colon healthy along with the microbes of the gut. 
Fibers have high water-holding capacity, contribute to easy 
passage of digesta due to bulkiness, and cause stomach dis-
tention, which reduces feed intake. Fibers decrease digestion 
and absorption of fat, vitamins, and minerals. As a protective 
mechanism, fiber can bind to some toxins and prevent their 
absorption into the bloodstream. Excessive dietary fiber is as-
sociated with loose stools, flatulence, increased stool volume, 
frequency, and decreased dietary caloric density. The measure 
of fiber is reported as crude fiber (the insoluble portions). Total 
dietary fiber is composed of both soluble and insoluble fibers.
4.1.1 Soluble fiber
Soluble fiber retains water and generally makes a dog’s fe-
ces softer. Common sources of soluble fiber are fruits and 
gums. Gums can improve canned food texture. Gum is a 
term used for a group of viscous and sticky polysaccharides 
found in seeds and plants. Many soluble fibers are also fer-
mentable. Fermentable fibers can be used by a dog’s normal 
gut bacteria to act as an energy source. Fibers also produce 
short-chain fatty acids, which can be used by intestinal cells 
as an energy source which is also called prebiotics.
4.1.2 Insoluble fiber
Insoluble fiber remains in grains. That fiber cannot ab -
sorb water; for that reason, it usually increases fecal bulk 
but does not soften feces. It is supplemented in the form 
of cellulose. Generally, supplemented fibers are mixed and 
soluble in nature. High-fiber diets are sometimes used to 
manage weight management, certain gastrointestinal condi-
tions, and diabetes mellitus.
4.2 Sources of carbohydrates
Basically, carbohydrates can be broken down into the fol -
lowing groups:
● Simple sugars
● Oligosaccharides
● Polysaccharides
All three play a crucial role in the daily diet of dogs. 
Polysaccharides, known as complex carbohydrates, are de -
fined based on how they are digested in the body. Fruits and 
honey contain sugar. Good sources of starches (a polysac -
charide) are corn, wheat, rice, barley, oats, and potatoes for 
dogs. Depending on the level of digestibility (slow, moder-
ate, or fast), wheat bran, rice bran, apples, and guar gum are 
good sources of starch for dogs. For a healthy dog, there is no 
such thing as a bad source of carbohydrates, but you can de-
fine them based on how they are digested in your dog’s body. 
Carbohydrates are lower on the glycemic index considered for 
dogs that have glucose intolerance and may be used in certain 
medical diseases that can be managed with these diets.

Nutritional strategies of dogs and cats  Chapter | 3  39
4.3 How much carbohydrates require for dog?
There is no specific required amount of carbohydrates for 
dogs. AAFCO does not have a requirement for carbohy -
drates due to the traditional preparations of commercial di -
ets. Commercial dog foods contain sufficient carbohydrates 
to meet up the daily amount of glucose required to main -
tain the nervous system for keeping it functioning normally. 
Dry dog foods naturally contain 32%–60% carbohydrates. 
Grains (i.e., wheat, corn, rice, oats, and barley) contain a 
maximum starch and are well digested and absorbed by 
dogs. It is vital to note that a diet without any carbohydrates 
will be higher in proteins and fats.
5 Vitamins in dog food
Vitamins are organic compounds that are necessary to per -
form many functions in a dog’s body, such as the creation of 
DNA, normal eye function, bone development, neurologic 
function, and blood clotting. There are some characteristics 
of a vitamin:
1. It is an organic compound but not a fat, carbohydrate, or 
protein.
2. It is essential in small amounts for normal function.
3. It hampers normal functioning if missing in the diet.
4. It cannot be synthesized in the body normally and 
minimum quantities are sufficient to support normal 
function.
Consumption of more vitamins over the recommended 
dose can lead to toxicity and other complications. It is very 
significant to observe sources of vitamins in a dog’s diet 
though deficiencies and excessive amounts can occur due 
to the inconsistencies in natural food products (liver, lungs) 
(Bischoff and Rumbeiha, 2012). It is ideal to use a vitamin 
and mineral supplement in proper amounts.
5.1 Which vitamins do dogs need?
There are quite a few vitamins that dogs require from their 
food. They can be separated into two categories: fat-soluble 
and water-soluble.
5.1.1 Fat-soluble vitamins
Bile salts and fats are required for the absorption of fat-  
soluble vitamins in a dog’s gut. The fat-soluble vitamins are 
A, D, E, and K.
Vitamin A
Vitamin A is also known as retinol. It is essential for normal 
vision, immune function, growth, healthy skin, and repro -
duction. American Association of Feed Control Officials 
(AAFCO) recommends 5000 IU/kg DM for dogs for all life 
stages. Vitamin A deficiency causes night blindness and skin 
issues. Toxicity also can occur with over-  supplementation 
which can cause bleeding and abnormal bone growth and 
formation. Natural sources with maximum amounts of vi -
tamin A include:
● Dairy products
● Fish oil
● Liver
● Egg
Deficiencies cause anorexia or decreased eating, stunted 
growth, weakness, and dull hair coat. Toxicities also cause 
stunted growth, anorexia, and bone fractures.
Vitamin D
Vitamin D, called cholecalciferol (D3) and ergocalciferol 
(D2), is essential for dogs because they are unable to pro -
duce naturally in the body. Vitamin D helps intestinal ab -
sorption and to keep calcium and phosphorus labeled in the 
bone. AAFCO recommends 500 IU/kg DM for dogs for all 
life stages.
Marine fish and fish oils are the richest natural sources 
of vitamin D and the other sources include freshwater fish, 
most dairy eggs, beef, and liver. The most common syn -
thetic sources are vitamin D3 and vitamin D2 supplements. 
Deficiencies can cause osteoporosis, rickets, enlarged 
joints, and other bone issues. Due to toxicities, there is an 
incidence of hypercalcemia, anorexia, and lameness.
Vitamin E
Vitamin E is also known as α-tocopherol and its acts as an 
antioxidant in the body. Toxicity is rare but can hamper the 
clotting times and mineralization of the bones. Deficiency 
can also create anorexia, skin and immune issues, and neu-
rologic concerns in dogs. It is the least toxic fat-soluble vi -
tamin among the four. AAFCO recommends 50  IU/kg DM 
for dogs. Only plants synthesize vitamin E. Vegetable oils, 
seeds, and cereal grains are the richest sources of vitamin 
E for dogs.
Vitamin K
Vitamin K, known as phytonadione, is helped in blood clot-
ting and bone development. AAFCO recommends 1.64 mg/
kg for puppies and adults. Deficiencies of vitamin K can 
cause increased clotting times and hemorrhage. Certain 
forms of vitamin K can cause anemia and jaundice. Alfalfa 
meals, oilseed meals, liver, and fish meals are rich sources 
of vitamin K.
5.1.2 Water-soluble vitamins
Water-soluble vitamins are readily absorbed by dogs. 
Deficiencies of those vitamins are common due to their fast 
use and no available storage in the body. There are nine es-
sential water-soluble vitamins in dogs:

40 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
Thiamin (B1)
Thiamin (B1) is concerned with many enzymatic reac -
tions in the body and also helps with the nervous system. 
AAFCO requires 1 mg/kg DM for dogs. Whole grains, liver, 
yeast, animal tissue, and meat are rich sources of thiamin. 
Deficiency causes anorexia, weight loss, muscle weakness, 
enlargement of the heart, seizures, and ataxia. Overdoses 
create decreases in blood pressure, heart, and respiratory 
issues.
Riboflavin (B2)
Riboflavin (B2) is concerned with many systems in a 
dog’s body. AAFCO requires 2.2  mg/kg DM for dogs. 
Deficiencies cause stunted growth and weight loss, as well 
as neurological, skin, heart, and eye issues. Toxicity has 
minimal side effects.
Pyridoxine (B6)
Pyridoxine (B6) helps in amino acid metabolism and the 
creation of neurotransmitters. The AAFCO recommended 
amount is 1  mg/kg. Vitamin B6 is found in meats, vegeta -
bles, whole-grain products, and nuts. Excess eating of B6 
causes signs of ataxia, signs of weakness, and falling down. 
Deficiencies result in anorexia, weight loss, stunted growth, 
anemia, convulsions, weakness, and kidney issues.
Niacin (B3)
Niacin (B3) helps in many enzymatic and physiologic re -
actions in a dog. The AAFCO requirement is 11.4  mg/
kg DM. The richest source of niacin is yeast, animal/fish 
by- products, cereals, legumes, and oilseeds. Deficiencies 
indicate anorexia, diarrhea, dermatitis, dementia, stunted 
growth, necrosis of the tongue (soft tissue damage in the 
oral cavity), drooling, and may cause death also. Toxicities 
cause blood in the feces and convulsions.
Pantothenic acid (B5)
Pantothenic acid (B5) helps in the metabolism of fat, pro -
tein, and carbohydrates. It plays a vital role in the produc -
tion of energy. AAFCO recommends 10 mg/kg DM for the 
stages of the dog. It is found maximum in meats (liver and 
heart), rice and wheat bran, alfalfa, peanut meal, yeast, and 
fish. Calcium pantothenate is the major form added to pet 
foods. Deficiencies can cause weight loss, a weakened im -
mune system, and heart issues. It can cause gastrointestinal 
upset in large doses.
Cobalamin (B12)
Cobalamin (B12) is the largest and most complex of the 
Vitamin B. It is involved in the metabolism of folate and 
is essential to cell function. The AAFCO requirement is 
0.022 mg/kg for dogs. Plants have very small amounts of 
vitamin B12. Certain microorganisms are able to create co-
balamin. Meat and some milk products are good sources. 
Deficiencies are anemia, poor growth, and neurologic is -
sues. Long-term feeding of certain vegetable-based diets 
may lead to vitamin B12 deficiency. Toxicities cause abnor-
mal reflexes and other neurologic conditions.
Folic acid (B9)
Folic acid (B9) helps with the synthesis of DNA and pu -
rines. AAFCO recommends 0.18 mg/kg DM for dogs. Folic 
acid is found in liver, egg yolks, and green vegetables, but 
it can be damaged by heating, freezing, and storing in wa -
ter. Deficiencies cause decreased eating and an inability to 
maintain or gain weight, blood issues (anemia, clotting is -
sues), and decreased immune function. Certain medications 
(sulfa drugs) can obstruct the absorption. No toxicities are 
found in the case of dogs.
Biotin (B7 or H)
Biotin (B7 or H) helps with the metabolism of fats, sugar, 
and amino acids. It is present in low quantities in many 
foods. The maximum amount of biotin is found in oilseeds, 
egg yolks, alfalfa meal, liver, and yeast. Biotin may be sup-
plemented to the dog with commercial food. Deficiencies 
generally occur due to feeding raw egg whites and certain 
antimicrobials. Raw egg whites can bind with biotin and 
make it unavailable to a dog’s body. A deficiency of bio -
tin may cause increased production of keratin along with 
dermatitis, hair loss, and a dull coat. There may be signs of 
stunted growth along with neurologic issues. No toxicities 
are found.
Choline
Cell membranes contain choline. It hampers fat absorption 
in the liver, is important in clotting and inflammation, and 
also helps with other body functions. Dogs can synthesize 
choline in the liver. It is not considered as a vitamin but 
is essential, and for that reason, it is added to many com -
mercial diets. AAFCO recommends 1200  mg/kg DM for 
dogs. Animal sources are egg yolks, glandular meals, fish 
and while cereal germs, legumes, and oilseed meals are the 
plant sources.
Deficiencies cause fatty livers in young dogs, increased 
blood clotting times, stunted growth, kidney issues, and an-
orexia. No toxicities were found in dogs. All-natural fats 
contain some choline. Lecithin is an emulsifying agent in 
foods and is the form of choline ingested in most foods.
5.2 Do dogs need vitamin supplements?
A completely balanced and formulated diet has all the vi -
tamins which require daily basis. Most of the commercial 
pet foods are fortified with vitamins. Diets that have an

Nutritional strategies of dogs and cats  Chapter | 3  41
AAFCO statement should be complete and balanced with 
all required vitamins. It is very important when choosing 
a diet for the pet that the AAFCO statement is included. 
If dogs are feeding a nontraditional diet that does not have 
an AAFCO statement, have to consult with a veterinary 
nutritionist to ascertain that the pet is meeting their daily 
nutritional requirements. All over-the-counter canine sup -
plements in many states are not required to go through food 
studies or bioavailability testing. Bioavailability can only be 
established through clinical and safety trials, which show 
the percentage of what active and inactive ingredients are, 
what is available, and what can be absorbed.
6 Minerals in dog food
Minerals are major structural components of the body fluids 
and electrolytes, the body’s organs and tissues, and muscle 
contractions. They are concerned with enzyme and hormone 
systems. There are two types of minerals: macro-minerals 
and trace minerals. Minerals help with many functions of a 
dog’s body and support structures. Biological systems may 
stop functioning without a balanced mineral profile.
6.1 Which minerals do dogs need?
There are different types of macro-minerals and trace min -
erals that are required to complete a balanced dog food.
6.1.1 Macro-minerals
Requirement of macro-minerals is more than 100 mg/Mcal.
Calcium (Ca)
Calcium (Ca) requires for teeth and bones development 
for maintaining their shape. Ca is also vital in cell com -
munication and is also involved in blood clotting, nerve 
transmission, and muscle function. About 99% of calcium 
is stored in the teeth and bones. More or less amount of cal-
cium can create an imbalance in phosphorus-calcium lev -
els. Deficiencies in calcium can cause bone reabsorption, 
loose teeth, decreased growth, anorexia, limping, lame -
ness, fracturing of the bone, and convulsions. Low calcium 
can cause eclampsia, kidney failure, and pancreatitis also. 
Hypocalcemia may cause limb lameness, joint swelling, and 
secondary hyperparathyroidism. For that reason, require the 
supervision of a veterinarian during supplementation.
Phosphorus (P)
Phosphorus (P) is important for many tissues and functions 
in a dog’s body. It is the secondary structural component 
of bone, teeth, DNA, and RNA. It also plays a role in cell 
growth, cell energy use, and amino acid and protein forma-
tion. AAFCO recommendations are 0.8% for growth and 
0.5% for maintenance of adult dogs. Maximum phosphorus 
comes from animal-based ingredients than plant-based in -
gredients (phytic acid). Meat tissue (poultry, lamb, fish, and 
beef) is high in phosphorus, followed by grains, eggs, milk 
products, and oilseeds. Toxicity can cause calcification of 
tissues and organs, loss of bone mass, urinary stones, and 
the inability to gain weight. Deficiencies can cause bone 
fractures, pica, decreased growth, and poor hair coat.
Calcium to phosphorus ratio
The desired proportion of the Ca/P ratio in cats is 1:1 while 
in the case of dogs is 1.4:1. The sources such as meat, poul-
try, and fish supplies Ca/P of 1:15–20. This may lead to Ca 
deficiency and causes NSH, Eclampsia (usually occurs in 
nursing mothers).
Magnesium (Mg)
Magnesium (Mg) is concerned with the structural composi-
tion of bones, helps in the metabolism of carbohydrates and 
fats, and also is a part of neuromuscular activity. AAFCO 
recommends 0.04% DM for growth and 0.08% DM for 
maintenance in adult dogs. Bone meal, lamb meal, oilseed, 
flaxseed, soybean meal, fibers, and unrefined grains are good 
sources of Mg. Deficiencies cause stunted growth, muscle 
contraction, anorexia, and mobility issues. More levels can 
cause paralysis and stone formation. Kidneys play an impor-
tant role in the regulation of Mg. The use of certain drugs, 
i.e., diuretics, cyclosporine, etc., can cause an imbalance.
Potassium (K)
Potassium (K) is rich inside the cells of a dog’s body. It helps 
in the maintenance of acid-base balance and osmotic balance, 
transmitting nerve impulses and muscle contractility. It needs 
to supplement in the diet because it is not stored in the body 
for future use. AAFCO recommends 0.6% DM for dogs. 
Yeast, soybean meal, unrefined grains, and fiber sources are 
the major sources of K. Excess supplementation is uncom -
mon but may cause heart and muscle issues. Deficiencies can 
cause lethargy, anorexia, and trouble walking.
Sodium (Na) and chloride (Cl)
Sodium (Na) and chloride (Cl) help in maintaining the os -
motic pressure and acid-base balance. Na is also significant 
in Ca absorption and helps the absorption of water-soluble 
vitamins. Anorexia, weakness, hair loss, and fatigue are the 
deficiency symptoms. Excess supplementation does not 
naturally occur until good quality water is not readily avail-
able but it can cause constipation, seizures, and death also.
6.1.2 Trace minerals
Trace minerals may also call microminerals that are re -
quired in least amount at less than 100 mg/Mcal. Following 
are the trace minerals.

42 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
Iron (Fe)
Iron (Fe) helps in oxygen transport throughout the body. 
Deficiencies can cause anemia, a rough coat, stunted 
growth, and lethargy. AFFCO recommends 80  mg/kg for 
dogs. Fe is present in liver, spleen, lungs, and also in some 
fibers. More amounts in the diet can cause anorexia, weight 
loss, and liver issues.
Copper (Cu)
Copper is also important in the formation and actions of dif-
ferent enzymes in the body, hemoglobin formation (oxygen 
movement), cardiac function, bone and myelin formation, 
immune function, and connective tissue development. The 
liver is the main location of copper metabolism. AAFCO 
recommends a minimum of 7.3 mg/kg DM for dogs. Meats 
particularly from cattle are rich in Cu. Deficiencies cause 
neurological conditions, abnormal growth, changes in hair 
color, and bone issues. Some breeds of dogs (Skye Terriers, 
Bedlington, and West Highland White) are more suscep -
tible to liver toxicity (i.e., hepatitis and increases in liver 
enzymes) from excess copper.
Zinc (Zn)
Zinc helps with enzymatic functions, protein synthesis, 
carbohydrate metabolism, skin and wound healing, and the 
immune system. Excess supplementation of Zn can inter -
act with other minerals and causes decreased absorption. 
AAFCO recommends 120  mg/kg DM for dogs. Meats and 
fiber sources contain a high amount of Zn. Deficiencies in-
dicate stunted growth, hair loss, a weakened immune sys -
tem, and growth disorders. Some arctic breeds ( Siberian 
Huskies and Alaskan Malamutes) require supplementation 
even with adequate dietary food levels.
Manganese (Mn)
Manganese helps in fat and carbohydrate metabolism and 
bone and cartilage development also. AAFCO recommends 
5 mg/kg DM for dogs. Fiber sources and fish meals are rich 
in Mn. Deficiencies can cause poor growth and deformities 
of bone development.
Selenium (Se)
Selenium helps in normal thyroid function and is concerned 
with the immune system, protecting cells from oxidative 
damage. AAFCO requirements are 0.11  mg/kg DM for 
dogs. Liver, fish, and eggs are high in Se. Deficiencies are 
rare though Vit-E can act as a replacement for Se in some 
functions. Long-term deficiencies can cause anorexia and 
edema. More amount of Se causes foul-smelling breath, 
vomiting, muscle spasms, falling and weakness, excessive 
drooling, anorexia, trouble breathing, and odor from the 
mouth and nail issues.
Iodine (I)
Iodine helps in the proper function of the thyroid. It helps 
to regulate body temperature and is involved in growth and 
development, skin and hair repair, and neuromuscular func-
tion. AAFCO recommends 1.5  mg/kg DM for dogs. Fish, 
eggs, and iodized salts are high in iodine. Iodine also found 
in commercial foods includes calcium iodate, potassium 
iodide, and cuprous iodide. Deficiencies and excessive 
amounts cause goiter, including enlarged thyroid glands, 
hair loss, lethargy, weakness, and fever.
7 Water requirements for dogs
Water requirement is determined by the amount of food that 
the animal consumes. Generally, animals require 1  mL of 
water for each kcal of energy. If a dog requires 1000 kcal per 
day, it requires 1000 mL of water. As food intake increases, 
water intake also increases. When the water content of a diet 
increases, animal drinks less water.
Water is considered the most essential nutrient since it 
performs many important activities, such as:
● Protect the nervous system
● Body temperature regulations
● Given that shape and structure to the body
● Helps in the breakdown of carbohydrates, proteins, and 
fats
● Lubricate joints
● Keep the shape of the eyes
Pets acquire water through diet and by drinking water. 
Generally, on average, the daily water requirement for an 
adult dog is 2.5 times of the amount of dry matter they con-
sume. This depends on many factors that affect the body 
(age, gender, size, stress, etc.) and the volume of dry matter 
which is consumed through the diet. Generally, a dog fed a 
moist diet will drink a smaller amount of water throughout 
the day due to higher moisture content (about >75% less).
8 Homemade balanced dog food?
Homemade feed for dogs  is possible. Feeding companion 
animals with commercial foods is not popular for economic 
reasons in developing countries. Pets are fed with home -
made foods or leftovers of food consumed in a family. So, it 
is essential to ensure that the dietary nutrient requirements 
are met through such feeding practices. Judicious inclusion 
of supplemental nutrients, and deficits in homemade or left-
over food can overcome nutritional deficiency disorders & 
support healthier life (Morelli et al., 2021).
8.1 The right puppy food?
Puppies require about two times higher calories per pound 
of body weight compared to an adult dog of the same breed.

Nutritional strategies of dogs and cats  Chapter | 3  43
Have to start feeding puppies a nutritious and exactly for -
mulated puppy food at around 4  weeks of age when the 
mother’s milk becomes insufficient. Generally, all puppies 
below 10 pounds should be fed 3 times in a day and those 
who are heavier than 10 pounds can be slowly weaned to 
twice-a-day feeding. Feeding with a routine will get their 
appropriate health with house training. Overeaten some 
breeds allowed them to gain too many calories, so one has 
to keep in mind to monitor their weight gain regularly with 
consultation of a veterinarian. Puppy food contains 25%–
30% protein.
9 Classification of pet food based on 
the nutrient content
9.1 Complete food
It is a food that provides all the nutrients required by the 
animal for 24 h.
9.2 Complementary food
This food is a food that provides only a part of the nutrients 
required by the animal for 24 h and the rest is met from ad-
ditional supplements.
9.3 Mixer biscuit
Mixer biscuit provides only essential nutrients.
9.4 Snack/treat
Snack/treats are foods to entertain/reward pet animals.
10 Dog food recommendations for 
overweight dogs
Nowadays, fatness becomes a common problem with dogs. 
Stress on an overweight dog may increase the risk of:
● Arthritis
● Diabetes
● Low energy
● Joint pain
● Exercise intolerance
Obesity occurs when energy intake exceeds than its re -
quirements (or the number of calories burned through activ-
ity and exercise). The surplus energy is stored as fat which 
stored as fat causes obesity. A maximum of dogs become 
obese due to overfeeding along with lack of exercise. The 
best way to manage obesity is to:
● Modify Feeding Habits:  It includes feeding smaller 
amount of feed more frequently to keep the dog from 
excessive hunger.
● Correct dog’s diet: Overweight dog has to reduce cal -
orie and also increase the fiber in diet which includes 
vitamins and minerals to maintain coat and skin health 
during dieting. Canned foods may be a better option due 
to fewer amounts of carbohydrates.
● Increase Exercise:  Both frequency and duration of 
exercise should be increased daily or longer exercise 
sessions. Regular exercise burns reduce appetite, more 
calories, changes body composition, and also increases 
metabolic rate.
11 Nutritional strategy to prevent 
disease in healthy dogs and cats
11.1 Feeding the healthy dog and cat
Healthy pet animals usually consume a sufficient amount of 
food to fulfill the energy requirements. The most metabolic 
stress occurs during growth, gestation, and lactation and the 
minor diet is most likely to result in nutritional problems. 
The maximum of commercial pet foods is formulated to as-
certain the sufficient intake of all necessary nutrients on the 
basis of energy intake.
11.2 How much to feed?
Prior to the recommendation of an amount to feed, the pet 
should experience a thorough physical examination to ensure 
that it is fit. On the basis of the physical examination, the ani-
mal’s body weight and body condition score (BCS) should 
be noted, as this information is crucial to determine the final 
feeding recommendations. A BCS is a one-sided evaluation 
of body composition that has been validated to compare with 
more quantitative determines of body condition, dual-energy 
X-ray absorptiometry (Laflamme et  al., 1994). Some BCS 
systems have been planned using 3, 5, or 9 points. The fa -
vored system is different from man to man. The five-point 
system scored to the nearest 1/2 unit is equivalent in selective 
capability to a nine-point system scored to the whole unit. 
When using the 5-point system, a 3 out of 5 is measured per-
fectly. Each point on the 5-point scale highlights an increase 
or decrease of 21%–30% in body fat below or above the ideal 
(i.e., 1 very thin and 5 fatty). A 4 or 5 out of 9 is measured 
as ideal when using the 9-point system. Each consequent 
point on the 9-point scale reflects an increase or decrease of 
11%–16% in body fat below or above the ideal (i.e., 1 thin 
and 9 grossly fatty). More significant than the system that the 
selection of a system that is used constantly on every patient.
Preferably the volume of food to feed a pet should be de-
termined by combining the data from the exam, body weight, 
and body condition score with a diet record. Diet record 
forms should be gathered and updated for every patient reg-
ularly. Information that should be incorporated in every diet 
record form includes, form (i.e., dry, canned, or  semimoist),

44 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
the specific product name and manufacturer of the pet’s 
diet, quantitative data on how much the pet is consuming 
daily, details regarding names and amounts of snacks and 
treats, information about who feeds the pet and the setting 
in which the pet eats their food. When owners are preparing 
homemade feed for the pet’s meals, details of ingredients 
and supplements as well as preparation methods should be 
recorded. When the pets are in an ideal body status, weight 
stable, and otherwise healthy, the recommendation of the 
amount of feeding is currently consuming provided an exact 
and detailed diet record is available ( Morgan et al., 2017 ). 
Determination of number of calories to feed may be more 
difficult if a diet record is unavailable. Maximum pet foods 
give guidelines on the product label and these can be used 
as an origin point. However, it is vital to understand that 
these guidelines are imperfect. Controlled studies have rec-
ognized that energy requirements may vary among similar 
animals though they are housed in similar conditions (NRC, 
2006). If it is essential to calculate the pet’s energy require-
ments, the recommendations are to determine the animal’s 
maintenance energy requirement (MER) by using the rest -
ing energy requirement (RER) equation and then multiply -
ing by the factor for the appropriate life stage ( Thatcher 
et al., 2010) in spite of using the single MER equation. This 
approach is more conventional and leads to less frequent 
misjudging of the actual energy needs of the pet.
11.3 How to feed?
There are mostly three types of feeding practices that can use 
to feed their dog or cat. They are free-choice feeding (ad li-
bitum or self-feeding), time-restricted feeding, and portion-
controlled feeding (meal feeding). It is also not unusual to 
observe more than one of these used in the same pets. Ad li-
bitum feeding confirms that there is an excess of food avail-
able at all times and relies upon the pet maintaining its daily 
caloric intake. That type of feeding allows cats to eat several 
small amounts of meals throughout the day, closely mimick-
ing their natural feeding behavior ( Kane et al., 1981 ). This 
type of feeding provides a minimal amount of work on be -
half of the owner, ensuring that subsidiary animals in several 
pet households have the chance to eat and help to minimize 
the noise connected with feeding, and may relieve dullness 
in kenneled animals. In addition, there may be an advantage 
relating to energy balance due to meal-induced energy loss. 
The disadvantages related to ad libitum feeding practice in-
clude the likelihood of avoiding medical problems, anorexia, 
and the rejection of food to subsidiary animals. It has been 
suggested that 31%–40% of dogs and cats will eat too much 
if food is available at all times ( NRC, 2006), so this type 
of feeding increases the chance that an animal will become 
fatty. Dry food may feed by pets in this manner.
Like ad libitum feeding, time-restricted feeding depends 
upon the animal’s capability to control their daily caloric 
intake. At meal time, an excess of food is given and the pet 
is allowed to consume for a time period. This type of feed -
ing is most relevant to dogs but not sensible for cats. The 
major advantages of this type are that it does not necessary 
much effort by the owner may be used with any type of 
pet food and permits some concentration of the dog’s food 
intake. This form of feeding may be unsuitable for choosy 
animals and may support gluttony and aerophagia. With 
portion-controlled feeding, the dog or cat is given an ex -
act amount of food, frequently divided into two meals per 
day. This method of feeding is the best approach for both 
dogs and cats in all stages of life excluding gestation/lacta-
tion (Schlesinger and Joffe, 2011 ). This type allows care -
ful monitor of the pet’s food intake, lowers the chance of 
fattiness, and alerts the owner of any medical problems. 
Offering food to one’s pet is an important part of human-
animal bonding and should be incorporated into a diet plan 
for every patient. Intake from snacks should not exceed 
8%–10% of the animal’s total daily calories. Few marketed 
products for dogs and cats are shown in Figs. 5–7.
FIG. 5 Feed for gastrointestinal problem in dogs.

Nutritional strategies of dogs and cats  Chapter | 3  45
11.4 What to feed?
One question is, “What is the best food for the pet?” The 
answer is “There is not one diet best for every cat or dog 
specifically. Cats and dogs are individuals for that reason 
the best diet will vary from animal to animal.” It is impor -
tant to judge three factors; the animal in question, the vari -
ety of exterior factors that may control how and what the 
animal is fed, and then lastly the product itself. There are 
major factors related to the animal diet. Not only  consider 
the animal’s age, species, breed, and sexual status but also 
its body condition, activity levels, and food or texture pref-
erences. External factors can have a powerful influence on 
final dietary recommendations for the pet. The diet and how 
the animal is fed may be influenced by its environment 
which includes but is not partial to the number and type of 
the animals in the household, where the animal is housed 
(i.e., indoors versus outdoors), the human inhabitants of 
the house (i.e., a household with small children, elderly 
FIG. 6 Feed for renal problem in dogs.
FIG. 7 Feed for cats.

46 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
 individuals or adults only), and the feeding practices of the 
owner. After monitoring the patient and the other factors in 
that animal’s environment, reflection needs to be given to 
the product itself (Berschneider, 2002). It is vital to choose 
a diet that supports the life stage of the patient that one is 
feeding and a lean body status when fed with an appropriate 
amount. The recommendations are feeding foods produced 
by larger manufacturers, if there is any problem with a diet, 
likely to be detected sooner. Strong suggestion should be 
given to companies that occupied animal nutritionists and 
support research in an effort to repeatedly improve foods 
and the knowledge about dog and cat nutrition. When stat -
ing specific recommendations, the foods have undergone 
and passed feeding trials in accordance with the Association 
of American Feed Control Officials’ (AAFCO) guidelines 
(2009) (Wichert et al., 2009).

47

Chapter 4
Clinical examination and diagnostic 
perspectives in dogs and cats
1 Introduction
The various physical examinations and diagnostic techniques 
are used by a doctor to determine the causes of illness accu-
rately, safely, and quickly and help to monitor the progress 
of treatments and conditions. Physical examination of dogs/
cats is a process for evaluating various anatomical findings 
through the uses of observation (looking at the body), pal -
pation (feeling the body with fingers or hands), percussion 
(tapping body parts with fingers, hands, or small instruments 
as part of a physical examination), and auscultation (listen-
ing to sounds) ( Swartz and Swartz, 2021). Diagnostic tests 
are used to find out the disease or condition of patients based 
on their signs and symptoms. These tests may also be used to 
help in planning treatment, finding out how well treatment is 
working, and making a prognosis. Diagnostic tests are either 
invasive or noninvasive. Invasive diagnostic testing involves 
puncturing to skin or entering the body. Examples are taking 
a blood sample, biopsies, and colonoscopies. Noninvasive 
diagnostic testing does not involve making a break in the 
skin examples that are X-ray, CT scan, etc.
2 Noninvasive diagnostic tests
The most common noninvasive diagnostic tests in pets are 
the following:
1. X-rays—A very simple cheap and less time-consuming 
procedure to detect the cause of pain, and fractures in 
various parts of the body ascertain the severity of an in-
jury, monitor the progression of diagnosed disease, and 
impact of ongoing treatment.
2. CT scan—A CT scan is a diagnostic imaging procedure 
that uses a combination of X-rays and computer technol-
ogy to produce images of the inside of the body. It shows 
detailed images of any part of the body, including the 
bones, muscles, fat, organs, and blood vessels. CT scans 
are more detailed than X-rays (Johns Hopkins Medicine, 
Based in Baltimore, Maryland, n.d. ). Diagnose muscle 
and bone disorders, such as bone tumors and fractures. 
Pinpoint the location of a tumor, infection, or blood clot. 
Guide procedures such as surgery, biopsy, and radiation 
therapy. Detect and monitor diseases and conditions such 
as cancer, heart disease, lung nodules, and liver masses 
(Mayo Clinic). Other well-known diagnostic technique 
helps veterinarian/practitioner to view cross sections of 
body parts. The cross-sectional images generate images 
that are high in detail as compared to a regular X-ray.
3. MRI—Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) is a type of 
scan that uses strong magnetic fields and radio waves to 
produce detailed images of the inside of the body. An 
MRI scanner is a large tube that contains powerful mag-
nets. You lie inside the tube during the scan (NHS). MRI 
involves the use of radio waves with magnetic fields as 
opposed to ionizing radiation used in CT scans. The lack 
of radiation makes MRI safer than CT scans but the cost 
is higher and quite time-consuming.
4. Ultrasound—An ultrasound is an imaging test that uses 
sound waves to create a picture (also known as a sono -
gram) of organs, tissues, and other structures inside the 
body. Unlike X-rays, ultrasounds do not use any radia -
tion. An ultrasound can also show parts of the body in 
motion, such as a heart beating or blood flowing through 
blood vessels. There are two main categories of ultra -
sounds: pregnancy ultrasound and diagnostic ultrasound.
a. Pregnancy ultrasound  is used to confirmation of 
pregnancy, the number of fetuses, and their posi -
tion in the uterus, also use to detection of gestational 
age, check for signs of down syndrome, and check 
for birth defects in the brain, spinal cord, heart, or 
other parts of the body. This test can provide infor -
mation about a baby’s growth, development, and 
overall health. Check the amount of amniotic fluid. 
Amniotic fluid is a clear liquid that surrounds a fetus 
during pregnancy. It protects the fetus from outside 
injury and cold. It also helps to promote lung devel-
opment and bone growth (Medlineplus).

48 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
b. Diagnostic ultrasound  helps in the detection of 
any abnormalities in internal parts (heart, blood ves-
sels, liver, bladder, kidneys, and female reproductive 
organs.) of the body. This test helps in identifying 
the cancerous and noncancerous growths on vital 
organs, and also detects any abnormalities in the ab-
domen and kidneys. Help in a guided biopsy proce -
dure. A biopsy is a procedure that removes a small 
sample of tissue for testing (Medlineplus).
3 Invasive pathology test
The most common noninvasive diagnostic tests in pets are 
the following:
3.1 Complete blood count (CBC)
The complete blood count or CBC gives information about 
a dog’s/cat’s blood clotting ability, hydration status, anemia, 
infection, and immune system response. CBC is essential 
for dogs/cats that have symptoms like fever, vomiting, di -
arrhea, weakness, pale gums, and loss of appetite. CBC is 
used to identify and quantify white blood cells, red blood 
cells, and platelets in a given amount of blood. This includes 
analyzing the shape and condition of the cells for health and 
functionality. This information is helpful in learning more 
about a dog’s/cat’s immune system (white blood cells) and 
oxygen-carrying capacity (red blood cell count) (Leelanau 
Veterinary Care).
A. Hematocrit (HCT): With this test, we can identify the 
percentage of red blood cells to detect hydration or 
anemia, RBC (red blood cells) are produced in bone 
marrow, to carry oxygen in the whole body. Red blood 
cells live in the bloodstream for about 100  days and are 
removed from the bloodstream by the spleen and liver. 
Red blood cell numbers can be decreased (anemia) if 
they are not produced in adequate numbers by the bone 
marrow, if their life span is shortened (a condition called 
hemolysis), or if they are lost due to bleeding. Numbers 
can be increased (polycythemia), usually due to the con-
centration of the blood due to dehydration. High levels 
of immature red blood cells can point to regenerative 
anemia. A complete blood count also includes a mea -
sure of hemoglobin, which is the actual substance in the 
red blood cell that carries oxygen (Leelanau Veterinary 
Care).
B. WBC (white blood cell) helps fight infections in pa -
tients. There are several types of white blood cells in 
the blood, including neutrophils (PMNs), lymphocytes, 
monocytes, eosinophils, and basophils. Lymphocytes 
are produced in lymph nodes throughout the body. The 
other white blood cell types are produced in the bone 
marrow. Neutrophils help to fight infection and also 
can be decreased in pets with bone marrow disease and 
some viral diseases. Lymphocytes also help fight infec-
tion and produce antibodies against infectious agents. 
Lymphocytes may be increased in puppies and kittens 
with an infection, and they can be decreased in severely 
stressed pets. Lymphocytes can be lost in some types 
of diarrhea. Certain drugs, such as prednisone, will de -
crease the number of lymphocytes in the bloodstream. 
Monocytes may be increased in pets with chronic infec-
tions. Eosinophils and basophils are increased in pets 
with allergic diseases, or parasitic infections (Leelanau 
Veterinary Care).
C. Platelets are produced in the bone marrow and are in -
volved in the process of making a blood clot. Platelets 
live for a few weeks and are constantly produced by the 
bone marrow. Low platelet counts occur in bone mar -
row damaged conditions, and does not produce them, 
or if the platelets are destroyed faster than normal. The 
two primary causes of platelet destruction are immune-
mediated destruction (ITP or IMT) and disseminated 
intravascular coagulation (DIC). Immune-mediated 
thrombocytopenia happens when the animal’s immune 
system destroys platelets. DIC is a complex problem 
in which blood clots form in the body using the plate -
lets faster than the bone marrow can produce new ones. 
Animals with a low platelet count bruise easily and may 
have blood in their urine or stool (Leelanau Veterinary 
Care).
D. Fibrinogen (FIBR): We can glean important informa -
tion about blood clotting from this test. High levels 
can indicate a dog is 30 to 40  days pregnant (Leelanau 
Veterinary Care).
3.2 Blood biochemistry
In blood biochemistry, several tests are recommended by a 
veterinarian, some of the common tests in pets (Rau Animal 
Hospital, n.d.) are the following:
A. Total protein  includes albumin and larger proteins 
called globulins, which include antibodies. Total pro -
tein can be increased if the dog or cat is dehydrated or 
if the pet’s immune system is being stimulated to pro -
duce large amounts of antibodies. The total protein is 
decreased in the same situations that reduce albumin or 
if the pet has an abnormal immune system and cannot 
produce antibodies (Rau Animal Hospital, n.d.).
B. Albumin is a small protein produced by the liver. 
Albumin acts as a sponge to hold water in the blood 
vessels. When blood albumin is decreased, water vol -
ume in the blood is low; the pressure created by the 
heart forcing blood through the blood vessels causes 
fluid to leak out of the blood vessels and accumulate in 
body cavities or tissues as edema. Albumin is decreased

Clinical examination and diagnostic perspectives in dogs and cats  Chapter | 4  49
if the liver is damaged and cannot produce an adequate 
amount of albumin or if albumin is lost through a dam -
aged intestine or in the urine due to kidney disease. The 
only cause of increased albumin is dehydration ( Rau 
Animal Hospital, n.d.).
C. Alkaline phosphatase originates from many tissues in 
the body. When alkaline phosphatase is increased in the 
bloodstream of a dog, the most common causes are liver 
disease, bone disease, or increased blood cortisol from 
specific drugs or because the animal has Cushing’s dis -
ease (hyperadrenocorticism). In cats, the most common 
causes of increased alkaline phosphatase are liver and 
bone disease (Rau Animal Hospital, n.d.).
D. ALT is an enzyme produced by liver cells. Liver dam -
age causes ALT to increase in the bloodstream ( Rau 
Animal Hospital, n.d.).
E. Amylase is an enzyme produced by the pancreas and the 
intestinal tract that helps the body break down sugars. 
Amylase may be increased in the blood in animals with 
inflammation (pancreatitis) or cancer of the pancreas 
(Rau Animal Hospital, n.d.).
F. Bile acids  are produced by the liver and are involved 
in fat breakdown. A bile acid test is used to evaluate 
the function of the liver and the blood flow to the liver. 
Patients with abnormal blood flow to the liver, a condi -
tion known as portosystemic shunt, will have abnormal 
levels of bile acids. The bile acid test measures a fasting 
blood sample and a blood sample 2  h after eating ( Rau 
Animal Hospital, n.d.).
G. Bilirubin is produced by the liver from old red blood 
cells. Bilirubin is further broken down and eliminated 
in both the urine and stool. Bilirubin is increased in the 
blood in patients with some types of liver disease, gall -
bladder disease, or when red blood cells are being de -
stroyed at a faster than normal rate (hemolysis). Large 
amounts of bilirubin in the bloodstream will give a yel -
low color to nonfurred parts of the body, which is called 
icterus or jaundice (Rau Animal Hospital, n.d.).
H. BUN (blood urea nitrogen)  is influenced by the liver, 
kidneys, and dehydration. Blood urea nitrogen is a waste 
product produced by the liver from proteins from the 
diet and is eliminated from the body by the kidneys. A 
low BUN can be seen with liver disease and an increased 
BUN is seen in pets with kidney disease. The kidneys 
must be damaged to the point that 75% are nonfunc -
tional before BUN will increase. Pets that are severely 
dehydrated will have an increased BUN (Leelanau 
Veterinary Care).
I. Calcium in the bloodstream originates from the bones. 
The body has hormones that cause the bone to release 
calcium into the blood and to remove calcium from 
the blood and place it back into the bone. Abnormally 
high calcium in the blood occurs much more commonly 
than low calcium. High blood calcium is commonly 
 associated with cancer. Less common causes are bone 
disease, poisoning with certain types of rodent bait, 
chronic kidney failure, and primary hyperparathyroid -
ism, which is overfunction of the parathyroid gland 
(Rau Animal Hospital, n.d.).
J. Low blood calcium may occur in dogs and cats just be-
fore giving birth or while they are nursing their young. 
This is called eclampsia and occurs more commonly in 
small-breed dogs. Eclampsia causes the animal to have 
rigid muscles, which is called tetany. Another cause of 
low blood calcium is the malfunction of the parathy -
roid glands that produce a hormone (PTH) that controls 
blood calcium levels. Animals poisoned with antifreeze 
may have very low blood calcium (Leelanau Veterinary 
Care).
K. Cholesterol is a form of fat. Cholesterol can be in -
creased in the bloodstream for many reasons in dogs. It 
is much less common for cats to have increased choles-
terol. Some of the diseases that cause elevated choles -
terol are hypothyroidism, Cushing’s disease, diabetes, 
and kidney diseases which cause the protein to be lost in 
the urine. High cholesterol does not predispose dogs and 
cats to heart and blood vessel disease as it does in people 
(Rau Animal Hospital, n.d.).
L. Creatinine is a waste product that originates from mus-
cles and is eliminated from the body by the kidneys. An 
elevation of creatinine is due to kidney disease or dehy-
dration. Both creatinine and BUN increase in the blood-
stream at the same time in patients with kidney disease 
(Leelanau Veterinary Care).
M. Creatinine kinase (CK) is released into the blood from 
damaged muscle. Elevation of creatinine kinase sug -
gests damage to muscle, including the heart muscle 
(Leelanau Veterinary Care).
N. Glucose is blood sugar. Glucose is increased in dogs and 
cats with diabetes mellitus. It may be mildly increased 
in dogs with Cushing’s disease. Glucose can temporar -
ily increase in the blood if the dog or cat is excited by 
having a blood sample drawn. This is especially true of 
cats. A quick test to determine whether a glucose ele -
vation is transient or permanent is to look at the urine. 
If the glucose is chronically elevated, there will be an 
increased amount of glucose in the urine as well. Low 
blood sugar occurs less commonly and can be a sign 
of pancreatic cancer or overwhelming infection (sepsis). 
Low blood sugar can cause collapse, seizures or coma, 
and depression (Leelanau Veterinary Care).
O. Lipase is another pancreatic enzyme that is responsible 
for the breakdown of fats. It can be increased in pa -
tients with pancreatic inflammation or cancer (Leelanau 
Veterinary Care).
P. Phosphorus—Elevations in this test are often associ -
ated with kidney disease, hyperthyroidism, and bleeding 
disorders. The bloodstream originates from bones and

50 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
is controlled by the same hormone, PTH (parathyroid 
hormone) that controls blood calcium. Phosphorus is in-
creased in the bloodstream in dogs and cats with chronic 
kidney disease (Leelanau Veterinary Care).
Q. Potassium is increased in the bloodstream in the pet 
with acute kidney failure. Potassium is lost from the 
body in vomit, diarrhea, and urine. Pets that are not eat-
ing may have low blood potassium, which can cause the 
pet to feel weak. Cats with low potassium may develop 
painful muscles. High levels can lead to cardiac arrest 
(Leelanau Veterinary Care).
R. Sodium is an electrolyte often lost in vomiting, diar -
rhea, kidney disease, and Addison’s disease. This test 
helps indicate hydration status, which may be slightly 
increased in the blood if the dogs and cats are dehy -
drated, although many dehydrated dogs and cats have 
normal blood sodium. Low blood sodium is commonly 
seen with Addison’s disease (hypoadrenocorticism) 
(Leelanau Veterinary Care).
3.3 Blood parasites in dogs
Different types of blood parasites are found in dog’s blood
A. Babesiosis is transmitted by ticks. It is a protozoan para-
site that infects red blood cells. Infection varies from 
a mild illness to a severe disease that rapidly results in 
death. Sometimes, the parasite causes a long-term dis -
ease with severe and progressive anemia. Babesiosis can 
be confused with other disorders that cause fever, ane -
mia, and destruction of red blood cells, jaundice, or red 
urine. Therefore, laboratory tests should be performed 
to confirm the diagnosis.
B. Hemotropic Mycoplasmas (Hemoplasmas)  
Mycoplasma haemocanis is a blood parasite that lives 
in the red blood cells of affected dogs. Infections do not 
cause any typical signs, but red blood cell destruction 
(hemolysis) can be seen in dogs. The parasites are trans-
mitted through the transfer of infected blood or through 
the bites of lice, flies, ticks, and mosquitoes. Blood tests 
help to diagnose the presence of parasites.
C. Hepatozoonosis—Hepatozoonosis is a disease of wild 
and domestic carnivores caused by a Hepatozoon pro-
tozoan. This organism is transmitted by ticks, its mode 
of transmission is unusual. The tick picks up the organ -
ism from an infected host while biting the animal. An 
uninfected dog gets the disease by eating the tick (or 
animals that ate a tick), not from being bitten by the tick. 
In most of the world, the protozoan Hepatozoon canis is 
transmitted by the brown dog tick, causing Old World 
hepatozoonosis. Infected dogs have no signs of infection 
or only mild signs. Having a suppressed immune system 
due to another disease appears to play an important role 
in the development of significant signs. Dogs older than 
4 to 6 months old are usually resistant to infection with 
H. canis. However, H. americanum causes severe signs 
even in adult dogs.
D. African Tsetse-transmitted Trypanosomiasis
i. Trypanosoma affects all domestic animals. In dogs, 
Trypanosoma brucei is most likely to cause disease. 
Infected tsetse flies inject the protozoa into the skin 
of animals, where they grow for a few days and cause 
localized swellings called chancres. They enter the 
lymph nodes, then the bloodstream, where they mul-
tiply quickly. The severity of the disease varies with 
the species and age of the animal infected and the 
species of trypanosome involved. The incubation pe-
riod is usually 1 to 4  weeks. The primary signs are 
fever, anemia, and weight loss. The eyes are often 
affected. Internally, the lymph nodes and spleen are 
usually swollen. The diagnosis is confirmed by labo-
ratory testing to identify trypanosomes in the blood 
of an infected dog.
ii. Surra (Trypanosoma evansi Infection)
Surra is usually transmitted by other biting flies that 
are found within and outside tsetse fly areas. It is 
mostly a disease of horses and camels, but all do -
mestic animals are susceptible. The disease can be 
deadly, particularly in horses, camels, and dogs. The 
development and effects of the disease, signs, physi-
cal changes, diagnosis, and treatment are similar to 
those of the tsetse-transmitted trypanosomes.
iii. Chagas’ disease (Trypanosoma cruzi Infection)
Chagas’ disease is caused by infection with another 
trypanosome, Trypanosoma cruzi . Insects transmit 
the disease between susceptible species of animals. 
Birds are not affected. The disease occurs most of -
ten in people and dogs. Dogs may become infected 
and introduce the trypanosome into houses where 
the bugs are present. People and dogs become in -
fected by contamination of wounds or by eating food 
contaminated with insect droppings that contain try-
panosomes. Affected dogs may die suddenly or have 
short- or long-term inflammation of the heart muscle. 
Other signs include swollen lymph nodes, decreased 
appetite and energy, weakness, vomiting, diarrhea, 
and an enlarged liver or spleen. Patients with long-
term infections can develop life-threatening heart 
failure. The disease is diagnosed by identifying the 
parasite or antibodies in an animal’s blood, Chagas’ 
disease is controlled by reducing the number of in -
sects that spread the disease.
3.4 Urine analysis
Urinalysis is the examination of normal and abnormal con-
stituents of urine. Complete urinalysis includes the exami -
nation of color, odor, turbidity, volume, pH, specific gravity,

Clinical examination and diagnostic perspectives in dogs and cats  Chapter | 4  51
protein, glucose, ketones, blood, erythrocytes, leukocytes, 
epithelial cells, casts, crystals, and organisms. It is used 
mainly to assess the health urinary system, can also reveal 
problems in other organ systems, and is important for diag-
nosing metabolic diseases such as diabetes mellitus. Urine 
samples examined as soon as possible after collection to 
prevent environmental artifacts.
3.4.1 Physical examination of urine
A. Color of urine in healthy dogs and cats is transparent and 
light yellow, yellow, or amber. The color intensity varies 
considerably with the concentration of urine, diet, medi-
cations, and the animal’s hydration status. Concentrated 
urine is dark yellow, whereas dilute urine is pale yellow. 
In comparison with standard yellow, darker yellow color 
is observed in the case of bilirubin and its associated 
products. Hematuria or hemoglobin may give red or 
brown color, whereas myoglobin gives a reddish-brown 
appearance. In cats, various drugs and foods have also 
been documented to cause urine discoloration. In cats, 
urine discoloration can occur after treatment with the 
antibiotics clofazimine (pink to brown) and rifampicin 
(orange-red) (Archer et al., 2005 ; Sink and Weinstein, 
2012). Some other abnormal colors of urine are seen in 
various causes, colorless or light yellow seen in dilute 
urine, milky white in pyuria, lipiduria, phosphate crys -
tals, and sperm in males.
B. Odor—Urine substances are intermediate or end prod -
ucts of several metabolic pathways, and they contain a va-
riety of structural patterns, such as ketones, alcohol, and 
sulfide, which often cause a particular smell. For certain 
instances, signature urine odors were specifically linked 
to particular biochemical conditions, and the sources of 
the odors were established (Mary, 2004). Standard urine 
has a faint odor of ammonia; nevertheless, the odor de -
pends on the urine quantity. It was reviewed that the odor 
can differ depending on the cat’s gender ( Reppas and 
Foster, 2016). Some odors suggest urinary infections: 
Ammonia (the urease-producing bacteria), putrid protein 
odor degraded by bacteria (gross hematuria and blood 
clots), and a hydrogen sulfide odor that may linger in uri-
nary tract infection induced by Proteus species ( Pages, 
2002). An acetone odor may be noted in urine from ani-
mals with ketosis/ketoacidosis (Mary, 2004). Urine odor 
may not be considered pathognomonic for any specific 
disease (Reppas and Foster, 2016).
C. Clarity/transparency/turbidity—Urine is usually 
clear. Semen, mucus, feces, and lipid can cause turbid -
ity in normal urine. Increased numbers of cells, crystals, 
casts, or organisms may increase urinary turbidity under 
disease conditions (Mary, 2004). As a result of changes 
in temperature and pH of urine sample, artifactual tur -
bidity can occur.
D. Volume—Urine volume depends on the state of hydra -
tion and the kidney’s ability to concentrate; it is inversely 
related to the specific gravity (Mary, 2004). Normal cats 
produce 18–28 mL/kg/day of urine (5–60  mL/kg/day in 
kittens); polyuria has a urine concentration of more than 
40 mL/kg/day ( Charles, 2006 ). Normal dogs produce 
20–100 mL/kg/day of urine (Reece, 2015).
E. Specific gravity —USG indicates the weight ratio of 
1 L solution to 1  L water and provides valuable infor -
mation on the kidney’s ability to concentrate or dilute 
the urine ( Wyness et  al., 2016 ). USG (Urine Specific 
Gravity) is measured by a refractometer. Refractometers 
are designed for the species being examined and several 
forms are usable, including automated refractometers. A 
drop of urine is put under the plastic cover on the glass 
and held to a light source as the inspector stares through 
the eye (Rizzi et al., 2017). Feline urine is more refrac -
tive than human urine, so feline USG is overestimated 
by around 0.002–0.005 when human-designed refrac -
tometers are used. While refractive indexes of humans 
and dogs are identical (Rubini and Wolf, 1956), USG in 
healthy cats and dogs range between 1.001–1.085 and 
1.001–1.075, respectively (Watson et al., 2015).
3.4.2 Chemical examination
A. Urinary pH —The normal urinary pH range of dogs 
and cats is 6–7.5 ( Kennedy et  al., 2016 ; Rizzi, 2014 ) 
Meat consumption, respiratory and metabolic acidosis, 
extreme vomiting and diarrhea, nausea, pyrexia, protein 
catabolic states, and urinary acidifier (ammonium chlo-
ride, ascorbic acid at high doses, citric acid, and me -
thionine) are several causes of acid urine ( Reppas and 
Foster, 2016) Causes of alkaline urine include a recent 
meal, diets low in protein, vegetable and cereal-rich 
diets, alkali ingestion (bicarbonate or citrate), urease-
producing bacterial ( Staphylococcus aureus , Proteus 
species, and Klebsiella species), renal tubular acidosis, 
metabolic, and respiratory alkalosis and drugs including 
acetazolamide, sodium bicarbonate, chlorothiazide, and 
potassium citrate ( Reppas and Foster, 2016 ; Thornton 
et al., 2018). Containers standing open for prolonged pe-
riods before testing, resulting in loss of carbon dioxide, 
can also cause artifact alkaline urine
B. Protein—The presence of protein in urine is called 
proteinuria, in dogs and cats proteinuria, can be classi -
fied as prerenal, renal, and postrenal. Prerenal includes 
hemoglobin from intravascular hemolysis, myoglobin 
from rhabdomyolysis, and immunoglobulin light chains 
from multiple myeloma or lymphoma. Renal causes 
identified are strenuous exercise, fever, seizure, expo -
sure to extreme heat or cold, causes of glomerular injury 
or dysfunction, any causes of renal tubular dysfunction, 
and intestinal nephritis. In postrenal proteinuria urinary

52 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
tract infection, urolithiasis, transitional cell carcinoma, 
and vaginitis are common causes (Harley and Langston, 
2012).
C. Glucose may appear in the urine if glycemia surpasses 
the renal threshold or even if renal tubular reabsorption 
is reduced ( Melandri et  al., 2020 ). Glucosuria usually 
develops when the blood glucose level surpasses ap -
proximately 200 mg/dL in dogs and 250–300  mg/dL in 
cats (Behrend et al., 2018 ). Common causes of glucos -
uria are diabetes mellitus, stress, especially in cats, and 
renal dysfunction (Rizzi, 2014).
D. Ketones—Ketonuria suggests a change from the me -
tabolism of carbohydrates to that of fat. This shift is 
most closely identified in small animals with ketosis 
secondary to diabetes mellitus, but hunger also leads to 
increased ketones. These conditions are influenced by 
metabolic demands which go beyond the level that car -
bohydrate metabolism can provide (Rizzi, 2014).
E. Bilirubin is not present in the urine sample of most do-
mestic animals, except dogs. Small amounts of biliru -
bin can be detected in healthy dogs, especially in dilute 
urine (Rizzi, 2014).
F. Blood—The presence of either hematuria (presence 
of intact erythrocytes in the urine) or hemoglobinuria 
(due to lysed erythrocyte) can be shown to be positive 
for blood or urine or myoglobinuria caused by skeletal 
muscle damage (Piech and Wyscilo, 2019).
3.4.3 Microscopic examination
A. Red blood cells (RBC) or erythrocytes —In assessing 
gross hematuria, it is important to verify the presence of 
RBCs by microscopy (Popa et al., 2017).
B. White blood cells (WBCs) or leucocytes—Small num-
bers of white blood cells in a free-catch sample may not 
be significant, but in general, an increased number of 
white blood cells indicate inflammation somewhere in 
the urinary system. Inflammation is often secondary to 
bacterial infection.
C. Epithelial cells—Low epithelial cell counts are found 
in the urine of healthy animals, especially catheterized 
samples that sluggish cells and substitute for new cells. 
It is difficult to distinguish epithelial cells based on their 
size in unstained wet mounts (Rizzi, 2014).
D. Transitional epithelial cells —As the catheter passes 
through the normal cells, catheterized samples will have 
an increased number of transition cells. Increased num -
bers are also noticeable in urinary tract infections and 
uroliths (Barger et al., 2017).
E. Squamous epithelial cells —The skin, distal urethra, 
vaginal tract, or prepuce can be the source of squamous 
epithelial urine cells. Squamous urine cells are usually 
caused by sample contamination and are not significant 
clinically (Barger et al., 2017).
F. Microorganisms—Urine is sterile, and thus the pres -
ence of bacteria, yeast, and fungi in urine is never natu-
ral (Piech and Wyscilo, 2019).
G. Crystals—Crystals in urine are a frequent finding and it 
is not always associated with the disease (Willems et al., 
2017). Urine crystals other than struvite and calcium 
oxalate dihydride are highly indicative of underlying 
disease. Struvite occurs chiefly in basic urine ( Remichi 
et  al., 2020 ). Cystine crystals predispose to uroliths 
due to its low solubility in acidic urine. Calcium oxa -
late monohydrate crystals create suspicion of ethylene 
glycol toxicity. Ammonium biurate or uric acid crystals 
are suggestive of underlying liver disease but can be 
normal in Dalmatians and English Bulldogs ( Piech and 
Wyscilo, 2019).
H. Casts—Urinary casts (Hyaline, Cellular) are cylindri -
cal molds formed by the lumens of the renal tubules. In 
urine from a healthy animal <2, hyaline casts per low-
power film and more than 1 granular cast per low film 
are observed.
I. Urinary casts (Hyaline, Cellular) are cylindrical molds 
formed by the lumens of the renal tubules. In urine from 
a healthy animal <2, hyaline casts per low-power film 
and more than 1 granular cast per low film are observed. 
Increased numbers of urine casts (cylinduria) localize a 
process of disease in the kidneys (Rizzi, 2014).
J. Lipid droplets—Lipid droplets are commonly found in 
feline urine samples (Rizzi, 2014).
K. Spermatozoa—The presence of sperm does not have 
clinical consequences when seen in a urine sample from 
intact male patients ( Vap and Shropsire, 2017 ). High 
numbers may suggest retrograde ejaculation in catheters 
or cystocentesis (Ridley, 2018).
3.5 Dog and cat fecal exams
A fecal examination of pets can help to check for intestinal 
parasites, which are a major cause of illness, or even death, 
in pets. Fecal exams are not just necessary for keeping your 
pets healthy, but they are also essential for keeping fam -
ily members healthy. Some dog and cat parasites can infect 
people, especially very young children, very old adults, or 
people with weakened immune systems. Fecal exam was 
performed for diagnosis of roundworms, hookworms, 
whipworms, giardia, and coccidia. Some of these parasites, 
including roundworms, hookworms, and giardia, are espe -
cially dangerous as they can be passed from pets to humans 
and cause zoonotic diseases. Infestation of parasites spread 
through contaminated water, food, and soil, by grooming 
themselves (licking their own skin and fur) from interaction 
with other pets, including mother to litter. Pets with intes -
tinal parasites that have common abdominal pain, diarrhea, 
dehydration, rough hair coat, distending abdomen, weight 
loss, vomiting, lethargic behavior, melena (blood in stool),

Clinical examination and diagnostic perspectives in dogs and cats  Chapter | 4  53
intestinal blockage have no symptoms and appear healthy 
and so regular testing as of pets is necessary.
There are four ways to conduct an Intestinal Parasite 
Screen (IPS).
A. Direct Fecal Smear—In this technique, a fecal sample 
is spread on a glass slide and analyzed under a micro -
scope. This type of test is limited to testing for a spe -
cific parasite and has less utility when testing a pet for 
general intestinal parasite infestation. Additionally, this 
test is performed in conjunction with other types of fecal 
tests and should not be relied upon as a sole indicator of 
possible infestation
B. Basic Fecal Flotation Test—The fecal sample is mixed 
in a special solution. After an hour, the eggs of worms 
and protozoan cysts float to the surface and can be ob -
served under a microscope. This is a common method of 
fecal examination in veterinary practices today.
C. Fecal Centrifugation/Flotation Test —The fecal 
sample is mixed with a special testing solution (salt or 
sugar), and then centrifuged it prior to flotation as de -
scribed above. This extra step increases the likelihood 
of recovering parasites in the sample versus the basic 
flotation alone. A microscopic analysis of the parasites 
will allow for worm identification based on the size and 
shape of eggs and larvae. This fecal test method pro -
duces more accurate results and is considered the stan -
dard for fecal testing in pets.
D. Antigen testing —This test recommends for the fecal 
samples that are sent to an outside reference laboratory. 
A special test is performed to detect antigens, or special 
proteins, in the sample which is produced by the para -
sites. This allows for the detection of the parasites even 
when they are not actively producing eggs or if eggs are 
not contained in the sample. As such, this test gives a 
much more accurate result than flotation results alone 
and can be used as an accurate test even when a large 
enough sample for flotation testing is not available. The 
results are typically reported within 24 to 48  h. When 
combined with fecal centrifugation and flotation, the di-
agnostic capability of the test increases, and the chance 
of missing a parasite infestation becomes very small.
Skin Scraping  is a test used in the diagnosis of every 
skin problem. This test is specially used for the detection 
of mites, which are microscopic in size. Mites could not 
see with the naked eye and were positively diagnosed by a 
skin scraping and subsequent analysis of the scraped ma -
terial under the microscope. There are two types of mites 
that are commonly diagnosed by skin-scraping Sarcoptic 
mange and Demodex (cigar-shaped). Mites burrow into the 
skin or hair follicles, some burrowing deeper than others. 
Sometimes we need to perform several scrapings at various 
locations to find mites. Some mites have a propensity to af-
fect certain areas, so these are the areas we emphasize when 
we perform the test. Demodex mites are relatively easy to 
find under the microscope, while Scabies (Sarcoptes) mites 
can be very difficult to find under the microscope. 
Method of skin scraping  gently scrapes the surface of 
the skin with a scalpel blade when a very small quantity 
of blood oozed out. This will yield skin, hair, dander, and 
sometimes mites if they are present. When the scraping is 
performed properly, there will be a small irritated area on 
the skin. This signifies that the scraping was done thor -
oughly enough to find mites that burrow deep. The minor 
irritation will resolve in a short time and does not need 
any medication. Then, scraped material was transferred 
on a slide for viewing under the microscope. The slide is 
methodically analyzed for mites, mite eggs, or infection 
of fungi.

54 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases

55

Chapter 5
Maintenance of fluids, electrolytes, and 
acid–base therapy in dogs and cats
1 Introduction
In clinical medicine, fluid therapy is used to achieve goals 
such as compensating for dehydration deficits, maintain -
ing proper hydration, replenishing lost electrolytes and 
nutrients, and acting as a conduit for the administration of 
certain intravenous drugs. The goals are similar for criti -
cally ill animals, except for the urgency of treatment. The 
procedures used to administer fluids frequently have an im-
pact on how the situation turns out. Therefore, physicians 
should be knowledgeable about the pathophysiology of 
the illnesses they are treating and how these ailments are 
associated with different kinds of commonly used fluids. 
The bodily fluids are grouped in functional compartments 
that are dynamic but well organized. Normal metabolic and 
physiological processes must be maintained in such com -
partments in terms of both content and volume. The electro-
lytes that are dissolved in body fluids play an essential role 
in almost every activity of life. Electrolyte transmembrane 
movements play a key role in many enzymatically driven 
metabolic activities as well as electrical events that lead 
to nerve transmission and muscular contractions. The pH 
of body fluids is maintained within specified limits. This 
is essential for maintaining the structure and function of 
proteins for the regular operation of metabolic activities. 
Almost all organ systems take part in maintaining fluid bal-
ance and/or are negatively impacted by imbalances. A state 
of disturbed fluid and electrolyte balance can be due to poor 
fluid intake, excessive fluid loss, or organ injury and mal -
function in many clinical states (El-Sharkawy et al., 2014). 
Successful patient care depends on accurate evaluation and 
the right therapy, regardless of whether fluid and electrolyte 
changes are the main issue or are merely secondary symp -
toms of another disease process. To accomplish this, one 
needs a thorough knowledge of the anatomy and physiol -
ogy of body fluids, the pathophysiologic mechanisms by 
which normal processes diverge, the methods for precisely 
identifying these disturbances, and finally the techniques 
for promptly, safely, and effectively correcting such distur-
bances (Tobias et al., 2022).
2 Body Fluid compartments
Water is essential for life. Normal physiological functions 
are hampered without water and if preventive measures are 
not taken, this might eventually result in death. Total body 
water (TBW) and fluid balance between the major physi -
ological compartments are maintained by appropriate fluid 
intake. A large portion of an animal’s body (60%) is made 
up of water. Homeostasis is maintained through the admin-
istration of various fluids in the body and the management 
of certain problems. It is crucial to have an awareness of the 
protein and electrolyte composition inside the body. Before 
moving ahead with a discussion of the evaluation of fluid 
imbalances or deficits, we need to take into account the or-
ganization and composition of the fluid compartments from 
which these losses occur. A comprehension of the forces 
that regulate the corresponding volume and composition of 
the body’s fluid compartments is important for understand-
ing both the clinical and clinicopathological indications of 
altered fluid balance. The distribution of total body water 
(TBW) within the bodies of the dog and cat is shown in 
Fig. 1.
2.1 Total body water
The most prevalent constituent in human and animal bod -
ies is water, where all fundamental physiological functions 
take place. Despite variations among different species, the 
majority of domestic animals have total body water (TBW) 
around 60% of body weight (0.60 L/kg), thus accounting 
for about 300 L in a 500 kg horse and 12 L in a 20 kg dog

56 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
(Kohn and DiBartola, 1992 ). This figure, however, may 
vary depending on age, gender, degree of obesity, and 
leanness of body mass. For instance, young animals like 
newborn pups and kittens have a considerably larger pro -
portion of water in their bodies than adults. Adipose tissue 
can contribute to an increased proportion of water in obese 
animals since it retains more water than muscle does, so 
body fat has a significant effect on the relative TBW. The 
huge TBW is mainly because of the extremely high extra -
cellular fluid (ECF) volume, which surpasses 0.40  L/kg at 
birth for most species. Within the first few days to weeks 
of birth, there is a quick initial drop and by 6 months of 
age, the TBW and ECF volumes are reaching adult values 
(Ku and Smith, 2015 ). The body’s compartments for wa -
ter are dispersed but connected. Intuitively, the body can 
be partitioned into extracellular and intracellular compart -
ments. About half to two-thirds of the TBW is accounted 
for by the ICF, while the remaining portion is accounted for 
by the ECF. Water is easily diffusible between these two 
compartments even though their electrolyte compositions 
are significantly different and they are in osmotic equilib -
rium. The amount of osmotically active molecules in each 
chamber plays a significant role in determining the relative 
volume distribution of water among these two chambers. 
The sodium concentration of the ECF determines its vol -
ume, whereas the potassium concentration determines the 
volume of the ICF.
2.2 Extracellular fluid volume
Instead of being firmly defined anatomically, the ECF is 
seen as a physiologic region. Depending on the animal spe-
cies and volume dilution technique used, the extracellular 
fluid volume of adult animals varies from 0.15 to 0.30  L/
kg body weight ( Carlson and Bruss, 2008 ). Extracellular 
fluid, or fluid outside of cells, makes up around one-third 
(33%) of the water in the body as a whole. The intravascular 
and interstitial compartments are additional divisions of ex-
tracellular fluid. The fluid that is kept inside blood vessels 
is found in the intravascular area. Plasma fluid,  proteins, 
 biological constituents, and different electrolytes pass via 
these channels. The region outside the blood vessels is 
known as the interstitial extravascular region. Interstitial 
fluid comprises 24% of TBW, whereas intravascular fluid 
only makes up 8%–10%. The joints, cartilage, cerebral 
space, and gastrointestinal tract all contain extremely mod-
est amounts of transcellular fluid. ECF volume maintenance 
is a complicated process in which many variables interact. 
The extracellular fluid (ECF) is made up of all the fluids 
present outside of the cells, including the interstitial fluid, 
plasma fluids (0.05 L/kg), and lymph (0.15 L/kg). The fluid 
volume of the gastrointestinal system is included in the 
transcellular fluids, which are typically thought of as a sub-
component of the ECF. The amount of fluid in the gastroin-
testinal system is often low in smaller animal species. The 
gastrointestinal tract often contains a significant amount of 
fluid in large animal herbivore species ( Cymbaluk, 2013). 
This gastrointestinal fluid storage can be used to maintain 
an efficient circulation volume during periods when water 
is deprived and some other types of dehydration. Sodium 
is present in the ECF fluids at levels ranging from 130 to 
150 mEq/L of water. The osmotic framework of the ECF 
is provided by sodium and the sodium level is the single 
most crucial factor affecting the amount of the ECF (Webb, 
2017). ECF volume declines during the shortage of sodium, 
whereas its excess is typically linked to water retention, 
causing edema (Gary et  al., 2008). The total body water 
content of a healthy dog ranges between 534 and 660  mL/
kg. In dogs and cats, the total intravascular fluid volume has 
been found to be 80–90 mL/kg. The amount of intravascular 
plasma water has been calculated to be around 50 mL/kg in 
dogs and 45 mL/kg in cats.
2.3 Intracellular fluid volume
The fluid content within cells is represented by the ICF 
volume, which contributes approximately two-thirds (66%) 
of total body water. This volume is computed as the dif -
ference between the recorded TBW and the estimated ECF 
volume since it cannot be measured directly. In a similar 
fashion to how sodium supplies the osmotic skeleton for 
the ECF, potassium does the same for the ICF. Water read-
ily diffuses within and out of the cell, causing changes in 
the ECF’s tonicity, which are quickly mirrored by equiva -
lent alterations in the ICF’s tonicity (Rondon-Berrios et al., 
2017). The migration of fluid throughout the cell membrane 
and the resulting variations in ICF volume are substantially 
responsible for alteration in its tonicity. Consequently, even 
water retention results in a drop in plasma sodium content 
while ICF volume rises. In contrast, the ICF volume falls as 
a result of hypernatremia brought on by water loss ( Asim 
et al., 2019). The division of intracellular water among the 
numerous organelles and subcellular regions is a subject of 
investigation during various pathological conditions.
FIG. 1 Distribution of total body water (TBW) within the body of a dog 
and cat.

Maintenance of fluids, electrolytes, and acid–base therapy in dogs and cats  Chapter | 5  57
3 Regulation of electrolytes and body 
fluids
There are several disorders of domesticated animals that 
occur due to disturbances of body fluids (free water), elec -
trolytes, and acid–base balance. Reduced circulating blood 
volume and tissue dehydration are the outcomes of an im -
balance in body water due to a greater loss of fluid that is 
eliminated from the body than is retained. On the other 
hand, consuming a lot of water quickly might cause over -
hydration (water intoxication). Electrolyte imbalances fre -
quently occur as a consequence of electrolyte loss, shifts in 
particular electrolytes, or absolute concentration alterations 
brought on by water loss. The majority of electrolyte imbal-
ances are brought on by a significant deficit of electrolytes 
caused by gastrointestinal tract diseases. Hyponatremia, hy-
pocalcemia, hypochloremia, and hypokalemia are common 
electrolyte abnormalities. In Table 1, the concentrations of 
the major anions and cations in plasma are listed.
The aforementioned changes in fluid and electrolyte 
balance will often take place simultaneously in most cir -
cumstances, to varying degrees, depending on the initial 
cause. The following are the factors that regulate the fluid 
and electrolyte balances:
3.1 Effective circulating volume or ECV
The portion of the ECF inside the vascular space and ac -
tively perfusing the tissues is referred to as the “effective 
circulating volume” (Ashoor and Somers, 2015 ). Effective 
circulating volume and ECF volume often fluctuate together 
in relation to total body sodium reserves. The fluid volume 
rises after sodium is added but decreases after its removal. 
Variations in cardiac output, renal sodium, vascular resis -
tance, and water excretion regulate the effective circulation 
volume. Cardiac output, venous return, and blood pressure 
drop with a reduction in circulation volume. Specialized 
volume receptors in the cardiopulmonary circulation and 
kidney sense reduction in pressure and volume and activate 
sympathetic tone, thereby increasing arterial and venous 
contraction, cardiac contractility, and heart rate. These re -
actions often boost cardiac output and systemic blood pres-
sure to make up for the volume loss.
3.2 Antidiuretic hormone
The osmolality of bodily fluids is primarily regulated by 
antidiuretic hormone (ADH). The hypothalamus produces 
antidiuretic hormone, which is secreted in response to 
variations in plasma osmolality. ADH release and plasma 
sodium concentration have a strong correlation because 
plasma osmolality is mostly determined by sodium content. 
Receptors in the hypothalamus detect changes in plasma 
osmolality and the body often reacts by increasing thirst to 
encourage water intake and releasing ADH, which boosts 
water reabsorption from renal collecting tubules. Activation 
of adenyl cyclase, which produces cyclic adenosine mono -
phosphate (AMP) and protein kinases, antidiuretic hormone 
affects the collecting tubules by changing their permeability 
to water (Rose, 1984).
TABLE 1 Concentrations of the major anions and cations in plasma.
Plasma electrolyte
Normal level
mg/dL mOsm/kg mMol/L mEq/L
Cations Magnesium 1.3 0.55 0.55 1.1
Calcium 5.0 1.25 1.25 2.5
Potassium 16.8 4.3 4.3 4.3
Sodium 326.6 142.0 142.0 142.0
Total cations 349.7 148.1 148.1 149.9
Anions Phosphate 3.4 1.1 2.0 1.1
Bicarbonate 146.4 24.0 24.0 24.0
Chloride 369.2 104.0 104.0 104.0
Proteins 7000.0 2.5 2.5 14.0
Sulfate, lactate, and 
others
– 5.5 5.5 5.9
Total anions 7519.0 137.0 135.5 149.9

58 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
3.3 Renin–angiotensin–aldosterone axis
The homeostasis of circulating fluid volume is maintained 
by the renin–angiotensin system. The JG cells of the glo -
merular afferent arteriole secrete rennin, a proteolytic en -
zyme, in response to decreased renal perfusion caused by 
hypotension, volume depletion, or elevated sympathetic 
activity. Renin changes the circulating globulin angioten -
sinogen into angiotensin I, which is further converted to 
angiotensin II, a potent vasoconstrictor, by the angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) in the lung and vascular endo -
thelial cells, which rectifies hypotension. By promoting 
aldosterone production from the adrenal cortex, angiotensin 
II enhances renal retention of salt and water to correct hy -
povolemia (Scott et al., 2022).
Aldosterone plays an important role in the preservation 
of efficient circulating fluid volume and potassium balance, 
primarily via its impacts on renal resorption of sodium in 
return for potassium and hydrogen ions. The adrenal cor -
tex produces aldosterone, which interacts with cytoplasmic 
mineralocorticoid receptors (MRs) to form the aldosterone–
MRs complex, which triggers the NA-mediated synthesis of 
certain aqueous channel proteins, causing retention of water 
by renal collecting tubules. Aldosterone also affects potas -
sium and sodium absorption in the gastrointestinal tract and 
reduces the loss of electrolytes from sweat glands to counter 
salt depletion.
3.4 Atrial natriuretic factor (ANF)
Atrial natriuretic factor (ANF), a group of peptide hormones 
widely recognized as atrial natriuretic peptide (ANP) and 
formed in the heart and released into the bloodstream in 
response to mechanisms, increases central venous pressure 
and stretches the atrial wall. Transmembrane receptors reg-
ulate the activities of ANF, which have a tendency to lower 
cardiac output and systemic blood pressure. Guanylyl cy -
clase produces cyclic guanidine monophosphate as a conse-
quence (Briggs et al., 2014). In the kidneys, ANF produces 
natriuresis and diuresis and also controls fluid volume in 
the brain.
4 Physiology of acid–base balance
The hydrogen ion level in ECF, which is typically 
40 nmol/L, is kept within extremely small bounds. This is 
around one-millionth the level of the other major electro -
lytes or 40  × 106 mmol/L. Hydrogen ions combine with 
cellular proteins to influence metabolic processes even at 
incredibly low quantities. The relationship between pH and 
hydrogen ion concentration is important because if the pH 
drops, the animal experiences acidosis due to an increase 
in hydrogen ion concentration and alkalosis after a fall in 
the concentration of hydrogen ions in the blood, as shown 
in Fig. 2. The conventional theory of acid–base equilibrium 
includes buffering both within and outside cells, controlling 
alveolar ventilation to low carbon dioxide levels, and regu-
lating renal hydrogen excretion ( Bheemasenachar, 2010). 
A buffer system is composed of a mildly dissociated acid 
and the salt of that acid. Variation in hydrogen ion levels 
is reduced due to buffering capacity of the body to take in 
or release hydrogen ions. Both intracellular and extracellu -
lar buffers contribute to the body’s buffering capacity. The 
bicarbonate (HCO3
−/H2CO3) and phosphate (HPO4/H2PO4) 
pairs as well as plasma proteins are examples of extracellu-
lar buffers. Organic and inorganic phosphates, proteins, and 
hemoglobin found in red blood cells serve as intracellular 
buffers.
FIG. 2 Conditions related to acid–base imbalance.

Maintenance of fluids, electrolytes, and acid–base therapy in dogs and cats  Chapter | 5  59
4.1 Metabolic acidosis
An increase in bicarbonate and a fall in pH are indicators of 
metabolic acidosis. According to the traditional view, either 
a reduction of bicarbonate ions or an increase of hydrogen 
ions might result in metabolic acidosis. In ECF, particularly 
the bicarbonate–carbonic acid pairs act as the first buffer 
during an acid load (Rose, 1984). The buffering mechanism 
is helped by intracellular buffers, mainly protein and phos -
phate. In response to an acid load, the intracellular migra -
tion of hydrogen ions in exchange for potassium ions serves 
to prevent an extreme rise in the ECF hydrogen ion content. 
Although the body’s overall potassium reserve reduces as 
a result of gastrointestinal or renal losses, this exchange, 
known as the cation shift, can still cause hyperkalemia. The 
most frequent reasons include renal failure, which may lead 
to a diminished capacity to eliminate hydrogen and conse -
quently retain bicarbonate and lactic acidosis, ketoacidosis, 
and gastrointestinal loss of bicarbonate, leading to diarrhea 
and other conditions ( Kraut and Madias, 2012 ). The com -
pensatory respiratory response of enhanced breathing will 
start lowering the pCO2 within minutes after the recognition 
of metabolic acidosis. For each mEq/L drop in bicarbonate, 
the respiratory reaction in dogs will result in a 0.7  mmHg 
reduction in pCO2 causing a drop in pH; however, the pro -
tective benefits of the respiratory response are temporary, 
lasting for a few days.
4.2 Respiratory acidosis
Respiratory acidosis is indicated by a drop in pH and a 
rise in pCO 2 and occurs due to a decline in alveolar ven -
tilation. The intracellular buffers almost entirely serve to 
first buffer the acid load brought on by respiratory acido -
sis. Respiratory acidosis cannot be buffered by the main 
ECF buffer and the bicarbonate–carbonic acid pair alone. 
Because carbon dioxide migrates through the lung consid -
erably more quickly than oxygen, conditions that impair 
ventilation typically cause drops in pO 2 before appreciable 
rises in pCO2. Increased pCO2 often serves as the primary 
stimulus for breathing because the respiratory center is 
particularly sensitive to even small alterations in pCO 2. 
Therefore, if the arterial pCO2 is maintained at normal lev-
els or increases due to intrinsic lung disease, ventilation 
will start to be improved as soon as the arterial pO 2 drops 
below 70–80 mmHg. Respiratory acidosis can result from 
any condition that impairs normal efficient breathing. Renal 
retention of bicarbonate is the compensatory reaction to re-
spiratory acidosis. A compensatory rise of 0.35  mEq/L of 
bicarbonate is predicted in dogs with chronic respiratory 
acidosis for every mm Hg rise in pCO2. Enhanced renal hy-
drogen secretion determines the magnitude of the increase 
in plasma bicarbonate levels in chronic respiratory acidosis 
(Koeppen and Stanton, 2013).
4.3 Metabolic alkalosis
A rise in pH and bicarbonate are signs of metabolic alkalo-
sis. Domestic animals can get metabolic alkalosis occasion-
ally, but ruminants with digestive issues are frequently found 
to be susceptible to it. An initial mechanism that can produce 
alkalosis is needed for the generation of metabolic alkalosis, 
as are other elements that are required for its maintenance. 
Increased hydrogen loss, bicarbonate accumulation, or con-
traction alkalosis all lead to the development of metabolic 
alkalosis. Reduced ECF fluid volume causes alkalosis be -
cause sodium- and chloride-containing fluid is lost or se -
questered without a corresponding decrease in bicarbonate. 
Metabolic alkalosis can be triggered by severe hydrogen ion 
depletion. In dogs and cats, vomiting-related gastrointesti -
nal losses constitute the most important causative factor for 
enhanced hydrogen loss. All of the elements that maintain a 
metabolic alkalosis compromise the renal bicarbonate out -
flow. The reduced glomerular filtration of bicarbonate found 
in some forms of renal failure may also be one of these con-
tributing mechanisms. However, the most frequent cause 
is enhanced renal tubular bicarbonate resorption, which is 
linked to the kidneys’ reactions to potassium and/or chloride 
deprivation and decreased effective circulating fluid volume. 
Hypokalemia is also another component that contributes to 
the maintenance of metabolic alkalosis (Rose, 1984).
4.4 Respiratory alkalosis
A rise in pH and a reduction in pCO2 are linked to respiratory 
alkalosis. Respiratory alkalosis is attributable to hyperventi-
lation, which may be induced by hypoxemia linked with con-
gestive heart failure, pulmonary disease, or severe anemia. 
In addition, neurologic conditions like salicylate poisoning 
or gram-negative bacterial sepsis that activate the medul -
lary respiratory center may be linked to hyperventilation. 
Animals in distress or experiencing pain may exhibit respira-
tory alkalosis. Dogs and other nonsweating animals requir-
ing respiratory evaporative mechanisms for heat loss to avoid 
overheating may experience hyperventilation (Tasker, 1980).
4.5 Mixed acid–base imbalances
Mixed acid–base disturbances occur when many primary acid–
base imbalances coexist. Respiratory acidosis or alkalosis may 
occur in conjunction with metabolic acidosis and/or alkalo-
sis disorders. Mixed acid–base disorders are unquestionably 
present in animals and have been described in the veterinary 
literature. The proper assessment of clinical and clinicopatho-
logical findings depends on an understanding of the possibil-
ity of the emergence of mixed abnormalities. When examining 
suspected mixed acid–base imbalances, it should be ensured 
that enough time has passed for the emergence of predicted 
compensatory reactions (Bhagavan and Ha, 2015).

60 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
4.6 Anion gap
The anion gap may be estimated as the difference between 
the detected cation (sodium) and the primary anions (chlo -
ride + bicarbonate) and is expressed as Anion gap = (Sodium 
+ Potassium) - (Chloride + Bicarbonate). Most domesticated 
animal species tend to have anion gaps that are similar to those 
reported for human beings, i.e., 10–20  mEq/L (Peter et  al., 
2017). Increased cationic protein polyclonal gammopathy 
(lgG), hyperchloremic acidosis, hypoalbuminemia and altered 
protein anionic equivalents decrease anion gaps, whereas 
 organic acids (lactic and keto acids), metabolic acidosis,  
hypovolemic shock, anaerobic exercise, diabetes, inorganic 
acids (sulfate and phosphate), grain overload, ketosis, uremic 
acidosis, nonmetabolizable acids, intoxication or poisoning 
with paraldehyde, salicylate, metaldehyde, metaldehyde, and 
poisoning with ethylene glycol and methanol increase anion 
gaps. The normal range of the blood gas and electrolyte deter-
minations in cats and dogs is shown in Table 2.
5 Assessment of imbalances
It is essential to know the difference between both volume 
regulation and osmoregulation. Osmoreceptors control 
 osmoregulation by affecting ADH and thirst; various vol -
ume receptors detect changes in volume and trigger effec -
tors like aldosterone. While increasing urine osmolality 
and increasing water absorption, the antidiuretic hormone 
has no effect on sodium transport. Aldosterone improves  
sodium absorption but not water absorption directly. As a 
result, volume regulation predominantly involves changes 
in sodium balance, while osmoregulation is accomplished 
by changes in the water balance. When water outflow from 
all routes equals water intake from all sources, water bal -
ance is attained. Water is accessible in three different forms: 
as drinking water, as feedstock water, and as metabolic wa-
ter produced by oxidative metabolism. After the oxidation 
of every 1 g of fat, carbohydrate, or protein, 1.07, 0.06, or 
0.41 g of water is produced, respectively. The four main 
ways that water leaves the body are through feces, urine, 
cutaneous water loss, insensible respiration, and in some 
animal species, sensible perspiration or sweat. Healthy 
animals are capable of keeping water balance within very 
small boundaries while at the same time ensuring the essen-
tial interaction between water balance and electrolyte bal -
ance, even though their day-to-day water intake and output 
may fluctuate significantly. Animals consume food to fulfill 
their caloric needs. Compared to animals eating dry hay or 
dried prepared pet food, which may contain less than 10% 
water, nursing or grazing animals may consume more than 
90% water in their feed.
5.1 Dehydration (water depletion)
In dogs and cats, dehydration is a somewhat common issue 
and occurs most often due to moderate to high fluid losses 
with inadequate water consumption. Serum sodium con -
centration and osmolality rise following water loss without 
or with little loss of electrolytes during panting or limited 
availability of feed and water. Hypertonic dehydration oc -
curs when fluid loss surpasses the loss of the replaceable 
sodium and potassium ions. The difference between total 
body water and exchangeable cations is referred to as a “rel-
ative water deficit.” ICF and ECF share water losses pro -
portionally and clinicopathological conditions result from 
excessive loss of water and electrolytes. Hypernatremia is 
attributed to the shrinkage of the ICF, leading to the con -
traction of the cells (Durrani et al., 2022). An isotonic fluid 
volume compression occurs when water losses are accompa-
nied by corresponding losses of exchangeable cations (i.e., 
130–150 mEq (130–150 retool) of sodium + potassium per 
liter of water lost). In many cases, isotonic dehydration de-
velops due to higher sodium loss than potassium. This form 
of dehydration is encountered in dogs and cats with severe 
diarrhea. The rise in serum sodium level from 140  mEq/L 
(140 mmol/L) to 155 mEq/L (155 mmol/L) indicates hyper-
tonic fluid volume contraction (Ackerman, 1990).
5.2 Overhydration (water excess)
Except in cases of sodium depletion and renal medullary 
washout, animals with psychogenic polydipsia are often ca-
pable of sustaining a proper water balance through sufficient 
renal water output. However, excessive fluid treatment for 
individuals with impaired renal function can lead to over -
hydration, which can happen iatrogenically. Plasma sodium 
TABLE 2 Reference values for blood gas and electrolyte 
determinations (Tasker, 1980).
S. No. Electrolyte or gas Cat Dog
1. Anion gap (mEq/L) – 15–25
2. Bicarbonate (mEq/L) 17–24 17–24
3. Calcium (mg/dL) 6.2–10.2 9.0–11.3
4. Chloride (mEq/L) 115–123 105–120
5. Osmolality (mOsm/kg 
H2O)
280–305 280–305
6. Magnesium (mg/dL) 2.2 1.8–2.4
7. Phosphorus (mg/dL) 4.5–8.1 2.6–6.2
8. Potassium (mEq/L) 4.0–5.3 3.7–5.8
9. Sodium (mEq/L) 147–156 140–155
10. pH 7.24–7.40 7.31–7.42
11. pCO2 (mm Hg) 29–42 29–42

Maintenance of fluids, electrolytes, and acid–base therapy in dogs and cats  Chapter | 5  61
content will decline if these fluids offer free water, such as 
with 5% dextrose, representing the shift in the relative wa -
ter balance. Saline or lactated Ringer’s solution, which are 
examples of isotonic sodium-containing replacement fluids, 
would enhance plasma and ECF volume without changing 
plasma sodium levels ( Epstein and Randall, 2006 ). This 
might result in cardiovascular overload, pulmonary edema, or 
systemic edema. The alterations in water balance in this case 
are secondary to sodium buildup, which is the main issue.
5.3 Sodium
About one-half to two-thirds of the body’s sodium is pres -
ent in the ECF volume. The majority of the sodium is bound 
in skeletal bone and only a small amount of it is quickly ex-
changeable. Thus, nearly all of the body’s easily accessible 
and exchangeable sodium is present in the ECF volume. 
The main factor affecting ECF volume is its transferable 
sodium content and sodium deficiency is the main factor 
contributing to reduced ECF volume ( Overgaard-Steensen 
and Ring, 2013 ). An increase in sodium concentration 
causes the ECF level to rise which may cause hypertension 
or edema. Regardless of the situation, the apparent plasma 
sodium content will mostly be influenced by relative water 
balance. Since it is difficult for dogs and cats to check their 
electrolyte balance on a regular basis, urine fractional ex -
cretion or creatinine clearance ratios have been considered 
as a substitute for daily consumption or possible imbalances 
of chloride, potassium, sodium, and other electrolytes.
5.3.1 Sodium depletion or hyponatremia
Sodium depletion is mostly related to extreme losses of 
sodium-containing fluid, usually arising as the consequence 
of gastrointestinal losses via diarrhea or vomiting. Dogs 
and cats with diarrhea that lasts for many days continue to 
lose a significant amount of sodium and the hyponatremia 
could get extremely bad. When animals with hyponatre -
mia are treated with solely sodium-free water or 5% dex -
trose, the condition might get worse (Elke and Kate, 2021). 
Additionally, dogs with proximal tubular dysfunction might 
develop hyponatremia. Both intrinsic renal impairment and 
the use of diuretics can cause increased renal sodium out -
flow. Hyponatremia causes an upsurge in the tubular secre-
tion of water in an effort to sustain normal osmotic pressure, 
resulting in a reduction in the ECF space, lowered circulat-
ing blood volume, peripheral circulatory failure, hypoten -
sion, and eventually renal failure. Common results include 
severe dehydration, hypothermia, and muscular weakness.
5.3.2 Excess sodium or hypernatremia
Sodium excess appears to occur mostly in combination with 
an excess of body water, contributing to an isotonic incre -
ment of ECF volume and the progression of hypertension 
or generalized edema. Failure to maintain an efficient cir -
culation volume can be caused by hypoalbuminemia, he -
patic fibrosis, and congestive heart failure, which in turn 
cause compensatory renal sodium retention ( Rose, 1984). 
Increased ECF volume in these situations is an attempt to 
regain effective circulating fluid volume; firstly, plasma vol-
ume may be reduced while ECF volume rises. ECF volume 
may be increased by 20%–30% before apparent edema. 
Sodium accumulation and edema can occur iatrogenically 
as the direct consequence of too much fluid, electrolyte, and 
acid–base balance sodium-containing fluid administration to 
patients with severely impaired renal function ( Lee, 2010). 
Dogs and cats can withstand high salt consumption as long 
as they have access to enough water to drink. Excessive salt 
consumption may take place when dogs that had been on 
salt-restricted diets are first allowed unlimited access to salt. 
Salt poisoning is typically accompanied by a rise in sodium 
concentrations in the plasma and/or cerebral fluid.
5.4 Potassium
Potassium is primarily an intracellular ion, with more than 
98% of the exchangeable potassium situated intracellularly. 
This potassium distribution tends to be associated with the 
active expulsion of sodium from the cells, which is sustained 
by an energy-dependent NaK pump at the cell membrane. 
The regulation of cardiac and neuromuscular excitability 
largely depends on potassium dispersion across cell mem -
branes. The overall rise in membrane potential caused by 
hypokalemia causes a hyperpolarization block that might 
cause weakness or paralysis. Hyperexcitability occurs as 
membrane potential falls due to hyperkalemia ( Robert and 
Bailey, 2019). These characteristics rely on the level of total 
body potassium concentration as well as on the quick occur-
rence of hypokalemia or hyperkalemia. Acute hypokalemia 
can result in a significantly higher change in membrane po-
tential and, thus, more pronounced clinical manifestations 
than hypokalemia that develops gradually with the same 
magnitude. The distribution of potassium between the ECF 
and ICF, in addition to external balance or the relationship 
between potassium input and output, is both regulated by 
potassium homeostasis (Rose, 1984). Variations in the acid–
base balance, exercise, catecholamine release, and admin -
istration of glucose and insulin have an impact on internal 
potassium balance.
5.4.1 Hypokalemia or potassium depletion
Potassium depletion results from an abnormal external bal-
ance where potassium losses from all sources exceed in -
take. In the majority of pet diets, potassium is available in 
quite high amounts. As a result, potassium depletion is not 
typically caused by dietary deficiencies alone. Moreover, 
dietary factors were related to hypokalemia in hospitalized 
cats, especially when attributed to conditions that caused

62 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
elevated potassium loss. Potassium depletion generally oc -
curs as the direct consequence of gastrointestinal losses 
from diarrhea or vomiting. Long-term administration of 
potassium-free fluids might increase tubular potassium 
excretion in animals with diarrhea and cause hypokale -
mia. Alkalosis may occur from a substitution of potassium 
ions for hydrogen ions in the renal tubular fluid, leading 
to hypokalemia. Increased mineralocorticoid administra -
tion, usage of diuretics, renal tubular acidosis, restoration 
of urinary obstruction-induced diuresis, and other factors 
can all lead to excessive renal losses ( Thomas and Du, 
2014). Potassium deficiency may cause changes in intracel-
lular pH, ICF volume, membrane potential, and potassium- 
dependent enzymatically mediated processes. Clinical signs 
include muscular weakness, rhabdomyolysis, ileus, renal 
failure, and cardiac arrhythmia.
5.4.2 Hyperkalemia or potassium excess
Potassium excess takes place infrequently and usually as 
a result of certain changes in the tubular secretion of po -
tassium. Potassium overload may be related to Addison’s 
disease, some types of renal illness, and clinical circum -
stances associated with hypovolemia and renal shutdown 
(Rose, 1984 ). Patients with substantially impaired renal 
function should be cautious when receiving large doses of 
potassium salts, either orally or intravenously. Compared 
to hypokalemia, hyperkalemia poses a greater risk to life. 
Cardiovascular function is significantly impacted by hy -
perkalemia (when exceeding 7–8  mmol/L). There is often 
pronounced bradycardia and arrhythmia, as well as the pos-
sibility of rapid cardiac arrest.
5.5 Chloride
Small variations in hydration usually cause shifts in plasma 
sodium and chloride concentrations that are generally 
proportionate to changes in sodium content. Variations in 
plasma chloride content are disproportionately correlated 
with acid–base variations. A disproportional hyperchlore -
mia is observed with low to normal anion gap metabolic ac-
idosis. In this form of acidosis, chloride concentration rises 
due to renal chloride resorption being elevated in propor -
tion to decreasing bicarbonate and correspondingly lower 
chloride losses than bicarbonate ( Thomas and Du, 2014 ). 
Consistently occurring disproportionate hypochloremia is a 
sign of metabolic alkalosis. These animals experience chlo-
ride deficiency as a result of the increased loss or sequestra-
tion of chloride-rich fluids. Modest variations in the relative 
proportions of plasma sodium and chloride can be attributed 
to shifts in water balance. A decrease in pure water results 
in a higher sodium concentration than a corresponding rise 
in chloride. Because of the rise in bicarbonate, this helps to 
establish a contractional alkalosis. The contrary is true and 
can lead to an extension of acidosis when there is an excess 
of pure water (Rose, 1984).
6 Clinical features of fluid and 
electrolyte balance
If an accurate initial assessment is to be made, good knowl-
edge of the interactions between particular impairments 
and their clinicopathologic effects is necessary. Once the 
medication has begun, overall clinical and clinicopatho -
logic findings will be affected not only by the main physical 
problem and compensatory reactions but also by the im -
pacts of chemotherapeutic drugs and fluid therapy. Accurate 
assessment of the fluid and electrolyte abnormalities, the 
related acid–base abnormalities, and the primary disease 
factors that cause these imbalances are necessary for ratio -
nal fluid therapy. An accurate history, a thorough physical 
examination, and a laboratory assessment of the necessary 
criteria are all required as part of the evaluation process.
6.1 History
Age, breed, sex, pregnancy, and lactation stage are funda -
mental signaling elements that affect the prevalence and se-
verity of numerous illnesses. Not only in the assessment of 
fluid and electrolyte abnormalities but also in the choice of 
fluid and patient care, the existence of a previous or concur-
rent disease state along with an appropriate drug history can 
be of utmost importance. Previous renal illness, the use of 
diuretics, or exposure to medicines that could be nephro -
toxic are particularly significant. It is really helpful to know 
how much feed and water are being consumed. The majority 
of animals that eat and drink normally are capable of keep-
ing their fluid levels balanced even when they are losing a 
lot of fluid. Dehydration can occur quickly, though, if fluid 
intake is limited or reduced while fluid losses are normal 
or increased. Neurologic conditions, head or neck trauma, 
as well as painful or obstructive lesions in the mouth, phar-
ynx, or digestive tract, can all cause an inability to drink 
enough water or eat enough food. These conditions can all 
lead to inadequate fluid intake. A lack of water intake is 
frequently caused by poor management, damaged or frozen 
water lines, etc. A history of polydipsia shows that there 
have been significant fluid losses. Diarrhea and vomiting 
are the main causes of fluid and electrolyte loss; however, 
these findings also represent gastrointestinal disturbances 
that could contribute to insufficient fluid and electrolyte 
consumption or absorption.
6.2 Clinical signs
Dehydration is characterized by the loss of body water. When 
fluid losses equal 4%–6% of body weight, clinical symptoms 
of dehydration are reported to become visible for the first 
time. Severe dehydration is considered prevalent when fluid 
losses exceed 12% of body weight and mild dehydration is 
characterized by fluid losses between 8% and 10% of body 
weight. It is crucial to understand that, even though these

Maintenance of fluids, electrolytes, and acid–base therapy in dogs and cats  Chapter | 5  63
recommendations have proved clinically helpful, there is not 
much evidence that most animal species exhibit this precise 
quantitative link. The most reliable indicator of variations 
in net water balance in emergency conditions is changes in 
body weight. The monitoring of individuals receiving fluid 
therapy is highly dependent on frequent measurements of 
body weight. If the regulation of kidney function is normal, 
urine volume is usually significantly suppressed. The clinical 
manifestations of dehydration rely considerably more on the 
trend of electrolyte loss than on absolute water loss. Clinical 
symptoms brought on by sudden drops in effective circu -
lation volume and hypovolemia are mostly responsible for 
acute sodium deficits. These symptoms include an elevated 
heart rate, drop in blood pressure, a longer time for capillar-
ies to refill, delay in jugular distensibility, and fall in pulse 
pressure. Urine output is usually reduced and urine chloride 
and sodium concentration levels are generally diminished. 
Reductions in ECF volume are always represented by de -
clines in plasma volume but the vice versa is not always true. 
The estimation of percent dehydration based on physical ex-
amination parameters is shown in Fig. 3.
7 Clinical and pathological indicators  
of fluid and electrolyte imbalance
7.1 Total plasma protein and packed cell 
volume
For the assessment of acute fluid and electrolyte abnor -
malities, total plasma protein (TPP) and packed cell volume 
(PCV) are simple, practical, and helpful measurements. If 
we suppose that there was no loss or gain of erythrocytes or 
protein from the vascular compartment, variations in PCV 
and TPP represent variations in plasma volume. There is a 
substantially greater range of normal for PCV than for TPP 
in the majority of animal species. For these estimates to be 
accurate, initial PCV and TPP levels must be recorded and 
there must not have been any protein or blood loss. Plasma 
volume reductions are most frequently caused by the se -
questration or loss of sodium-containing fluid, which can 
happen as a result of renal failure, obstructive bowel dis -
ease, diarrhea, and vomiting. In these conditions, plasma 
volume changes cause both PCV and TPP to rise, but not 
necessarily to the same degree. ECF volume gradually de -
creases to sodium deficiency is typically accompanied by 
alterations in plasma volume. As plasma volume declines, 
the PCV and TPP levels increase. When sodium-containing 
fluids are given to dehydrated volume-deficient patients, 
plasma volume re-expansion is represented by the return of 
PCV and TPP toward the normal limits. Decreasing PCV 
and TPP in responding to fluid treatment are the two most 
beneficial lab indicators of the return of effective circulat -
ing fluid volume and ought to be associated with clinical 
findings such as the return of regular pulse pressure, jugu -
lar distensibility, and capillary refill time (Daly, 2015). The 
electrolyte concentration that can be expressed per liter of 
serum or plasma water is:
Sodium mEq/liter H 2O Measured sodium (mEq/
liter) = % Water × 100.
7.2 Hyponatremia
Hyponatremia should be treated as a sign of relative wa -
ter excess. Hyponatremia is frequently but not inevitably 
FIG. 3 Estimation of percent dehydration based on physical examination parameters.

64 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
related to conditions that induce sodium reduction and 
eventual reduction in effective circulating volume. These 
conditions include excessive sweat loss, vomiting, diar -
rhea, and adrenal insufficiency. Dehydration and volume 
loss caused neurohormonal reactions that led to increased 
thirst and improved renal water and sodium storage, which 
in turn led to higher water consumption. Fluid losses in 
such types of dehydration are often hypotonic or isotonic 
and early fluid and electrolyte deficiencies do not result in 
hyponatremia until water intake and/or renal fluid reten -
tion interrupt the harmony between the residual exchange -
able cations as well as the total body water. Therefore, 
even if these conditions are linked with significant sodium 
and potassium losses, the assessment of sodium deficiency 
should be predicated on other factors because the plasma 
level of sodium does not necessarily reflect these deficien -
cies. The increase in sodium-containing fluid inside body 
cavities as a consequence of peritonitis, ascites, or a rup -
tured bladder is regarded as a “third space” issue ( Rose, 
1984). The fluid that collects in the “third space” has a 
composition that is comparable to the ECF. When this 
fluid retention occurs quickly, plasma volume decreases 
and serum sodium levels may decline as the compensat -
ing reactions occur in water retention. Excessive water 
retention- related hyponatremia can also happen in the ab -
sence of severe sodium deficiency or drops in the volume 
of effective circulation. Hyponatremia may be demon -
strated with psychogenic polydipsia if the amount of wa -
ter intake is greater than the kidney’s ability for free water 
clearance because of intrinsic renal impairment or renal 
medullary washout. Table 3 provides a list of the typical 
sources of hyponatremia.
Additionally, patients with renal impairment who have 
reduced free water clearance or who are under the effect 
of an improper ADH release may experience this. When 
large amounts of free water are given to patients who have 
impaired kidney function, hyponatremia, and related fluid, 
electrolyte, and acid–base balance, neurologic abnormali -
ties may arise ( Lakritz et  al., 1992 ). As shown in Fig.  4, 
the urine sodium level can be helpful in differentiating the 
origins of hyponatremia. Kidney adaptive reactions usually 
lead to sodium retention and the generation of urine with 
very low sodium levels in patients with sodium loss arising 
from elevated sweat loss, vomiting, diarrhea, or third space 
issues. The presence of hyponatremia and hypokalemia in 
adrenal insufficiency is typically accompanied by a com -
paratively high urine sodium content. In dogs with psycho-
genic polydipsia, the urine sodium level is more likely to be 
lower than it is in those with the syndrome of inappropriate 
secretion of antidiuretic hormone (SIADH), which is char -
acterized by high levels of sodium in the urine when the 
hyponatremia is present. Dogs and cats with renal failure 
might have quite a range in the sodium concentration of 
their urine (Rose, 1984).
7.3 Hypernatremia
Elevated serum osmolality is often a symptom of hyperna -
tremia. Hypernatremia tends to happen in dehydrated pa -
tients when water outflow exceeds losses of both sodium 
and potassium and ought to be regarded as a sign of a rela -
tive water deficiency. This can happen in the early phases of 
vomiting, diarrhea, or kidney problems if the outflow of wa-
ter exceeds the electrolytes lost. In Table 4, a list of frequent 
causes of hypernatremia is provided. As water losses are 
restored by improved water intake and/or increased renal 
fluid retention, the serum concentration of sodium dimin -
ishes into or below the range of normal. Hypernatremia also 
begins to develop as the consequence of a primarily pure 
fluid loss, such as with the evaporative respiratory water 
loss in dogs. Food and water depletion in healthy subjects 
is linked to a significant decrease in urine and fecal output. 
TABLE 3 List of common sources of hyponatremia.
Causes of hyponatremia
False 
hyponatremia
Hyperproteinemia
Hyperlipidemia
Hyperglycemia
Hyponatremia
(relative water 
excess)
Decreased effective circulating volume
 Diarrhea
Vomiting
Excessive sweating
Burns, cutaneous loss
Blood loss
Repeated pleural drainage 
(pleuritis, chylothorax)
Adrenal insufficiency
Peritonitis
Ruptured bladder
Ascites
Excessive circulating volume
 Nephrotic syndrome
Congestive heart failure
Chronic liver failure
Normal effective circulating volume
 Renal disease
Inappropriate ADH secretion
Psychogenic water drinking

Maintenance of fluids, electrolytes, and acid–base therapy in dogs and cats  Chapter | 5  65
However, persistent cutaneous and respiratory insensible 
fluid loss may lead to hypernatremia. In young dogs, ab -
normal thirst responses have been linked to hypernatremia. 
Hypernatremia may arise briefly following the administra -
tion of hypertonic saline or sodium bicarbonate if fluid in -
take is constrained or impaired (Shah et al., 2014).
7.4 Serum potassium
Serum potassium level does not always represent potas -
sium balance, but it is affected by variables that modify 
the internal balance, i.e., the distribution of potassium 
throughout the cell membrane between both the ECF and 
ICF, as well as variables that also change the external bal -
ance, i.e., potassium consumption and output ( Udensi and 
Tchounwou, 2017 ). However, variations in potassium lev -
els occur under many clinical conditions and have signifi -
cant consequences on the neuromuscular system, mostly 
as a result of variations in cell membrane potential. The 
compensating reactions to modify circulating fluid volume 
distribution and acid–base balance could consequence in 
conflicting findings.
7.4.1 Hypokalemia
Hypokalemia arises quite often in dogs and cats and may 
be a direct consequence of the exhaustion of the body’s po-
tassium stores or from the redistribution of potassium from 
the ECF into the ICF space. The most common cause of 
hypokalemia is high potassium loss from the digestive tract 
as a consequence of diarrhea or vomiting. Elevated renal 
loss of potassium outcomes from the activity of mineralo -
corticoid overflow, the activity of some diuretics, and as the 
consequence of changed renal tubular activity in animals 
with renal tubular acidosis or post-obstructive conditions. 
Chronic nutritional K + deficiency ultimately can give rise 
to moderate hypokalemia sometimes in normal subjects. A 
quickly evolving and complex hypokalemia may develop in 
FIG. 4 Possible causes of hyponatremia.
TABLE 4 List of common sources of hypernatremia.
S. No. Causes of hypernatremia
1. Pure water 
deficit
Primary hypodipsia (ex. Miniature 
schnauzers
Diabetes insipidus (central and 
nephrogenic)
Fever
Inadequate access to water
High environment temperature
2. Hypotonic 
fluid loss
Renal Post-obstructive diuresis
Chemical diuretics
Nonoliguric acute renal 
failure
Chronic renal failure
Osmotic diuresis 
(diabetes mellitus and 
mannitol infusion)
Extrarenal Cutaneous (Burns)
Third space loss 
(pancreatitis and 
peritonitis)
Gastrointestinal 
(vomiting, diarrhea, and 
intestinal obstruction)
3. Impermeant 
solute gain
Hyperaldosteronism
Hyperadrenocorticism
Salt poisoning
Hypertonic fluid administration
(Sodium bicarbonate, sodium 
phosphate enema, and hypertonic 
saline

66 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
dogs with diminished dietary intake because of anorexia if 
combined with the other factors that cause extreme potas -
sium loss. Hypokalemia could develop without potassium 
exhaustion as the consequence of intracellular drift of po -
tassium from the ECF space. This occurs with acute alka -
losis and in subjects treated with insulin as well as glucose 
infusions (Chacko et al., 1998).
7.4.2 Hyperkalemia
Hyperkalemia can be developed iatrogenically by too much 
administration of potassium salts, but it does not typically 
arise from elevated dietary intake in subjects with nor -
mal kidney function. Hyperkalemia may build up in vitro 
in blood samples due to hemolysis or extended storage of 
blood specimens before the isolation of serum or plasma 
from RBCs in the sample. The majority of dogs and cats 
have erythrocytes with high sodium but low potassium 
concentrations. Minor hemolysis will have a minimal im -
pact on serum or plasma potassium levels in these species. 
Hyperkalemia may be associated with increased renal po -
tassium accumulation in conditions like Addison’s disease, 
acute renal failure, and renal shutdown secondary to insuf -
ficient effective circulatory fluid volume. In a number of 
cases, the transfer of intracellular potassium into the ECF 
without a shift in the external potassium balance leads to 
hyperkalemia. Hyperkalemia evolves in combination with 
metabolic acidosis, especially when the acidosis outcomes 
from volume reduction are confounded by the renal shut -
down. Hyperkalemia may be observed in diabetic patients 
or temporarily in animals with enormous muscle necrosis 
(Menegussi et al., 2018).
7.5 Serum chloride
Anion chloride, which also combines with sodium to pro -
duce common salt, generally follows sodium in the physi -
ological functions that control body fluid and electrolyte 
balance. It is getting more and more obvious that this might 
not always be the case and that many of the issues associ -
ated with sodium retention do not appear without an excess 
of chloride as well. The hyperchloremia and hypochlo -
remia that are usually seen in combination with roughly 
proportional shifts in sodium level are caused by modifica-
tions in body water balance. Variations in chloride content 
that are not linked with a similar trend in sodium level are 
generally linked with bicarbonate levels. A disproportion -
ate rise in chloride most frequently is attributed to a normal 
to low anion gap hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis and 
could be seen as a compensatory reaction for a primary 
respiratory alkalosis. Disproportionate declines in chloride 
levels are characteristically observed in metabolic alkalo -
sis and could also be considered a part of the compensat -
ing reaction for prolonged primary respiratory acidosis 
(Edwards, 2008).
7.6 Osmolality
It has already been demonstrated that the level of sodium in 
serum water is strongly related to serum osmolality across 
a remarkable range of physiological and pathophysiologi -
cal states, provided that adequate corrections for differ -
ences in glucose and urea levels are made. The assessment 
of serum osmolality has two particular and very beneficial 
purposes. Initially, to evaluate whether serum fluid content 
broadly differs from normal and furthermore, to monitor for 
the presence of external low-molecular-weight substances 
in the bloodstream. Assessment of serum osmolality for 
such reasons involves the simultaneous correlation of the 
measured osmolality and the calculated osmolality as as -
certained from the measured concentrations of the main sol-
utes in serum (sodium, glucose, and urea). The difference 
between the measured and the calculated osmolality might 
be regarded as the osmolal gap. The main cation in serum 
is sodium, which is balanced by a variety of anions such as 
sulfate, chloride, bicarbonate, phosphate, and protein. In the 
calculation of osmolality, the sodium content, which is of -
ten multiplied by a factor of 2, gives a good indication of the 
overall electrolyte concentration, including anions and cat -
ions in the sample. The water concentration of serum sam -
ples is generally 94%, as it was already stated. Modification 
of the fluid content of serum is not essential since, coinci -
dentally, it is mitigated by the assertion that sodium chlo -
ride does not really dissociate totally and has an osmotic 
coefficient of 0.93 in serum. Thus, the osmolality may be 
computed using the measured sodium content as well as the 
content of the two serum nonelectrolytes that are usually 
present in quantities high enough to affect osmolality:
mOsm kgHS odium GlucoseU rea/ 2 02/g32/g120 /g14/g14
This measurement is reasonable if levels of so -
dium, urea, and glucose are expressed in mmol per li -
ter. Converting glucose concentration from mg/dL to 
mmol/L involves dividing by 18, whereas urea content 
in mg/dL can be transformed to mmol/L by dividing by 
2.8. Reductions in the osmolar gap demonstrate labora -
tory error. An increase in the osmolar gap ( >10 mOsm/
kg) can also be the consequence of laboratory mistakes, 
although they often happen under one of two conditions: 
either a drop in serum water level or the presence of low-
molecular-weight compounds in serum. Reductions in 
serum water level appear with significant hyperlipidemia 
or hyperproteinemia and the calculated osmolality would 
then surpass the measured osmolality. The occurrence of 
a comparable imbalance between the measured and cal -
culated osmolality in the apparent lack of hyperlipidemia 
or hyperproteinemia should prompt an alert for the ap -
pearance of external compounds at unusually high lev -
els in the serum. These compounds may include a wide 
range of external and possibly harmful substances such as

Maintenance of fluids, electrolytes, and acid–base therapy in dogs and cats  Chapter | 5  67
mannitol, ethanol, ethylene glycol,  paraldehyde, metha -
nol, ethyl ether,  isopropanol, acetone, and trichloroethane 
(Saxton and Seldin, 1986 ) (Table 5).
8 Purpose of fluid therapy
What is being attempted to achieve? is a crucial question to 
address while selecting a fluid type for the patient. The most 
common indications for fluid therapy are: Replacement of in-
travascular volume deficiencies to enhance tissue  perfusion, 
replacement of tissue interstitial volume deficiencies (de -
hydration), providing maintenance fluid requirements in 
patients who are not taking enough fluid, and replacement 
of ongoing losses due to pneumonia, burns, vomiting, di -
arrhea, severe wounds, and fluid accumulation in the third 
body space are all treated with additional fluid therapy 
(Fig. 5). The majority of these cases just need crystalloid 
fluid treatment, while colloids or oxyglobin may also help 
supply intravascular volume. In some conditions, fluid di -
uresis is needed, including with renal disease, or to quicken 
the removal of toxins that are removed from the body by the 
kidneys. In these conditions, substitute crystalloid fluids are 
suggested. Rates needed to stimulate proper diuresis can be 
as high as 2.5- to 4.0-fold a patient’s maintenance needs; 
preferably, the rate must be aligned to urine output. Patients 
who are having surgery or receiving anesthesia should also 
receive fluid therapy. Anesthetics generally reduce cardiac 
output, vascular tone, or even both. When it happens, blood 
flow to the body tissue is reduced (i.e., poor perfusion). Fluid 
therapy expands the circulatory system which enhances 
perfusion. Additionally, several surgical procedures result 
in sufficient blood loss to significantly reduce intravascular 
volume. Recommended substitute crystalloid fluid adminis-
tration rates for normovolemic patients receiving anesthesia 
are 5 mL/kg/h for techniques in which limited blood loss is 
expected (e.g., orthopedic surgery, uncomplicated soft tis -
sue surgery) and 10 to 15  mL/kg/h for processes in which 
medium blood loss is predicted (e.g., liver and splenic sur -
gery) (Epstein and Waseem, 2022 ). In surgeries in which 
the patient is unstable or may lose huge amounts of blood, 
colloid fluids, crystalloid fluids, oxyglobin, blood products 
or even some combination of these could be  considered 
 necessary at significantly higher rates than those listed 
previously. Fluid treatment is also useful when a  particular 
TABLE 5 Conditions that can increase serum osmolarity 
and osmolal gap.
S.No. Conditions
1. Diabetes mellitus
2. Ethylene glycol
3. Ethanol
4. Methanol
5. Renal failure
6. Salt intoxication
7. Ketoacidosis (β-hydroxybutyrate and acetoacetate)
8. Parenteral nutrition
9. Salicylates
10. Elevation in sulfate and sodium, phosphate
11. Lactic acidosis
12. Administration of radiocontrast media, sodium 
phosphate enema, and mannitol
FIG. 5 Purpose of fluid therapy.

68 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
fluid is required. In conditions where the patient is ane -
mic, whole blood (fresh or stored), packed red blood cells, 
or oxyglobin can be injected to provide oxygen-carrying 
molecules. In conditions where the patient seems to have 
a coagulopathy, frequently frozen plasma, cryoprecipitate, 
or fresh-frozen plasma would provide certain clotting fac -
tors. Fresh-frozen plasma supplies all clotting factors while 
frequently frozen plasma gives all clotting factors except 
the most labile (i.e., factors V and VIII) (i.e., factors V and 
VIII). When a patient has decreased plasma protein content 
which may occur in protein-losing renal or intestinal disor-
der, persistent starvation or vasculitis, fluids with massive 
osmotically active molecules, like colloids, oxyglobin, or 
plasma (fresh-frozen or regularly frozen), must be given for 
oncotic support. Eventually, intravenous nutrient fluids are 
suggested whenever the patient is not capable of eating ad-
equate food for a prolonged time. Special conditions, where 
fluid therapy is needed, are listed in Table 6.
TABLE 6 Fluid therapy for special circumstances.
Condition Pathophysiologic setting Fluid therapy recommendations
Heart failure 
or myocardial 
dysfunction
Increased ADH release CVP measurements recommended
Increased RAA mechanisms Monitoring essential
Prone to fluid overload PWP is optional but difficult to do
Avoid excess fluid administration when in actual CHF
Maintain on low-sodium-containing solutions
Anemia Increased plasma volume Infuse at maintenance rate if possible
Increased cardiac workload Avoid rapid volume loading with crystalloid
Rapid heart rates Avoid excess amounts of crystalloid
Prone to fluid overload
Hypoproteinemia Starling’s forces favor fluid escaping into 
interstitial and 3rd spaces
Provide colloids, plasma referred, and hetastarch beneficial 
when required
Decreased plasma oncotic pressure Avoid excess crystalloid
Pulmonary 
contusion and 
ARDS
Right to left shunting predisposes to “wet” lungs Avoid overhydration
The viable lung is predisposed to fluid 
accumulation
Try to avoid any significant systemic hypotension
Leaky capillary–alveolar junctions Crystalloid vs colloid is still debated
Hypertonic saline can be used for resuscitating patient with 
pulmonary contusion
Head trauma Brain fluid autoregulation disrupted Correct hypovolemia with crystalloid boluses, but avoid 
full volume loading. Do not exceed 40–60 mL/kg to correct 
hypovolemiaBrain swelling tendency
 Maintenance volumes should maintain normal blood pressure 
at the low range of normal
Oliguric renal 
failure
Impaired renal perfusion First replace dehydration deficits
Inadequate renal filtration If still oliguric, can administer:
Excess maintenance fluid volumes will cause 
fluid overload
(a) Furosemide 4–8 mg/kg
(b) Dopamine 1–2 μgm/kg/minute
(c) Mannitol 0.5–1.0 g/kg in the absence of coexisting 
hyperosmolality
Renal failure with 
congestive heart 
failure
Tendency for fluid overload due to RAA and 
ADH mechanisms
Under ideal circumstances monitor with CVP and urine output 
measuring
The needs of one condition complicate the 
other
Prognosis fair to dismal
A Swan–Ganz pulmonary artery catheter would be ideal

Maintenance of fluids, electrolytes, and acid–base therapy in dogs and cats  Chapter | 5  69
9 Type of fluids
Currently, five basic groups of fluids are available for 
injectable use in dogs and cats: crystalloids, colloids, 
hemoglobin- based oxygen-carrying solutions, blood prod -
ucts, and intravenous nutrition. Each one of these fluid 
forms has particular indications for its use. The cornerstone 
of fluid therapy is crystalloid fluids. Crystalloid fluids pri -
marily consist of water with a sodium or glucose base, espe-
cially with the addition of other electrolytes or buffers. The 
varying amounts of these various solutes govern the selec -
tion of a specific crystalloid in diverse clinical conditions. 
There are four distinct forms of fluids in the crystalloid 
category: dextrose in water, replacement solutions, mainte-
nance solutions, and hypertonic solutions. A comparison of 
commonly used parenteral fluids in the dog and cat is listed 
in Table 7. Replacement crystalloid fluids contain soluble 
solutes that closely resemble the solute concentrations ob -
served in plasma water. These therapies are recommended 
for the quick replenishment of intravascular volume and 
electrolytes in cases of shock and hemorrhage as well as 
acute volume depletion caused by losses from vomiting, 
diarrhea, fluid loss from the third body space, and severe 
diuresis. When employing replacement crystalloid fluids, 
only 20%–25% of the administered volume of fluid stays 
inside the intravascular compartment 1 h following infusion 
(Saraghi, 2015). Hence, significant amounts of replacement 
crystalloids should be given to replenish intravascular vol -
ume. The widely available replacement solutions consist of 
normal saline (0.9% sodium chloride; NaCl) and balanced 
electrolyte solutions, such as Ringer’s solution (with lac -
tate or acetate), Normosol R (Hospira, Inc., Lake Forest, 
Illinois), and Plasmalyte A (Baxter Healthcare Corp., 
Deerfield, Illinois). Each form of replacement fluid indi -
cated here has a unique electrolyte content and may be ab -
sent (e.g., 0.9% NaCl) or contain a variety of buffers (e.g., 
lactate, acetate, or gluconate), which makes it preferable but 
not always necessary to use it.
10 Routes of administration
In general, fluids can be administered orally, subcuta -
neously, intraperitoneally, topically, intravenously, and 
intraosseously. For a severely ill patient, the two latter 
methods are favored because they provide easy access to 
the intravascular space. Medium- to large-sized dogs and 
animals that are very dehydrated should get fluids intrave -
nously. It permits a regulated delivery rate to accommodate 
the patient’s fluctuating requirements. For intravenous ad -
ministration, a cannula must be inserted into a vein with 
sterile technique and the intravenous delivery unit must 
then be kept sterile. A successful result depends on under -
standing these criteria and the potential risks that can arise 
from this kind of therapy. The more serious complication 
involves fluid overload, phlebitis, catheter sepsis, and the 
accidental flow of fluid into the neighboring perivascular 
subcutaneous tissue ( Al-Benna et  al., 2013 ). Intravenous 
catheters must be changed and repositioned to some other 
site every 72  h to prevent many of these iatrogenic prob -
lems. With the correct methods, the benefits far outweigh 
the drawbacks. When an intravenous method cannot be 
used, intraosseous fluid treatment is the preferable option 
for dogs and cats weighing less than 5 kg. Actually, because 
of the bone marrow’s direct connections to systemic circu -
lation, it can be considered a large, rigid vein through which 
most medicines can be securely delivered. The intraosseous 
method for fluid therapy is a safe and effective route for 
the seriously ill patient. After sufficient blood pressure is 
regained, the approach for fluid delivery is shifted to the 
intravenous route. In Table 8, the different fluid administra-
tion routes in dogs and cats are contrasted.
11 Monitoring fluid therapy
Fluid administration requires monitoring for both the de -
sired outcome and any potential negative effects, just like 
with any other medication. It requires “hands-on” work to 
monitor the condition properly when patients are receiv -
ing fluids. The patient’s weight, skin turgor, physical ap -
pearance, mental status, pulse rate, and respiratory rate 
and effort, periodic lung auscultation for crackles, mucous 
membrane color, and capillary refill time are all clinical 
assessment findings that ought to be assessed. Skin turgor 
enables a quick evaluation of hydration status. When dehy-
dration levels are between 6% and 8%, skin turgor is no -
ticeably prolonged and it is significantly prolonged when 
dehydration levels are above 8% ( Goucher et  al., 2019 ). 
Health status can affect the effectiveness of skin turgor 
evaluation since obesity can cover up declines in skin turgor 
as well as emaciation may artifactually aggravate skin tur -
gor. When an indwelling urinary catheter has been in place, 
serial assessment of fluid input and urine output could pro-
vide valuable information on whether too little or too much 
fluid has been administered. Additional helpful information 
is provided by renal function markers, such as BUN, serum 
creatinine, and urine-specific gravity. Elevated BUN and se-
rum creatinine levels, as well as high urine specific gravity 
(also known as prerenal azotemia), may be indicators that a 
patient is not getting enough fluids. Details regarding tissue 
perfusion can be obtained from blood gas analysis or the 
assessment of serum lactate level. Increased blood lactate 
levels or metabolic acidosis could be signs that tissues are 
not getting enough oxygen for metabolism and are therefore 
turning to anaerobic metabolism for energy. The clinical 
benchmark in veterinary medicine for assessing the efficacy 
of fluid therapy is sequential central venous pressure (CVP) 
evaluation, which estimates the potential of the right side of 
the heart to pump blood forward.

TABLE 7 Comparison of commonly used parenteral fluids in dogs and cats.
Solution
Electrolyte content (mEq/L) Osmolality
(mOsm/L) Acetate Lactate
Glucose
(g/L)
Calories
kcal/L TonicityNa+ Cl- Ca++ K+ Mg++
Lactated Ringer’s 130 109 3 4  273  28   Isotonic
Acetated Ringer’s 131 98 3 4 3 295 28    Isotonic
Ringer’s 147 155 4 4  310     Isotonic
Sodium chloride (NaCl) 0.45% 77 77    155     Hypotonic
Sodium chloride (NaCl) 0.9% 154 154    310     Isotonic
Dextrose 2.5%      126   25 85 Hypotonic
Dextrose 5%      253   50 170 Hypotonic
Dextrose 10%      505   100 340 Hypertonic
Dextrose 50%      2525   500 1700 Hypertonic
Dextrose 2.5% in half-strength lactated Ringer’s 65 55 1 2  265  14 25 85 Isotonic
Dextrose 5% in lactated Ringer’s 130 111 3 4  525  28 50 170 Hypertonic
Dextrose 2.5% with 0.45% sodium chloride (NaCl) 77 77    280   25 85 Isotonic
Dextrose 5% with 0.45% sodium chloride (NaCl) 77 77    405   50 170 Hypertonic
Dextrose 5% with 0.9% sodium chloride (NaCl) 154 154    560   50 170 Hypertonic

Maintenance of fluids, electrolytes, and acid–base therapy in dogs and cats  Chapter | 5  71
TABLE 8 Routes of fluid administration in dogs and cats.
Route Indications and advantage Technique
Complications and 
contraindications
Oral 1. For anorectic patients with short-
term illness
2. More conducive for small animals 
<20 kg
3. Very conducive for neonates
1. Can use a stomach tube, 
pharyngostomy tube, small dosing 
syringe, or a small baby bottle and 
nipple, depending on the animal’s 
size and underlying illness
2. Warm fluids to body temperature
1. Aspiration pneumonia
2. Not useful for hypovolemic 
shock
3. Should not be used in vomiting 
animals
4. Avoid air administration
Subcutaneous 1. For correction of mild-to-moderate 
dehydration
2. For maintenance in not too 
severely ill patients
3. Not conducive for animals 
weighing >10 kg
1. Use isotonic fluids
2. Best to administer by gravity flow 
through an 18- to 20-gauge needle 
(for an adult-sized cat; use smaller 
needle for pediatric patients)
3. Do not deposit more than 10–12 mL/
kg per injection site
4. Fluid should be deposited dorsally 
along the area bordered by the 
scapulae anteriorly and the iliac 
crests posteriorly
5. The average 5- to 6-kg cat can receive 
150–200 cc once or twice daily
1. Avoid using hypertonic and 
hypotonic fluids
2. Do not deposit fluids under 
infected or devitalized skin
3. Not useful for hypovolemic 
shock
4. Do not use irritating solutions
Intraperitoneal 1. When intravenous access is 
unavailable
2. Provides a vehicle for delivering 
ample volumes of fluid over a 
short time period
3. Relatively rapid absorption
1. Use isotonic fluids
2. Use needle gauges 16–20, depending 
on the patient’s size
3. Prepare a sterile injection site just 
lateral to the midline and midway 
between the umbilicus and the pelvic 
brim
1. Hypertonic fluids will worsen 
the dehydration
2. Do not use if patient has 
abdominal sepsis, ascites, or 
peritonitis
3. Do not use with pending 
abdominal surgery
Intravenous 1. Preferred route for severely 
dehydrated and hypovolemic 
patients
2. Best route for correcting 
hypotension
3. Provides for rapid delivery at the 
most precise dosage
4. Most effective for medium and 
large dogs
1. Prepare a sterile site for needle or 
cannula intravenous insertion
2. Amount and rate of fluid delivery 
depends on the patient’s status
3. Use isotonic fluids for volume 
repletion
4. Maintain a completely sterile IV 
cannula and infusion system
1. Avoid intravenous overload 
caused by the excess fluid 
delivery
2. Avoid catheter sepsis and 
phlebitis
3. Avoid catheter displacement 
and the inadvertent 
extravascular placement of the 
fluid infusion
Intraosseous 1. When intravenous access is 
unavailable
2. Particularly useful in small animals
3. Provides direct access to the 
vascular space
1. Prepare a sterile site 1 cm distal to the 
tibial tuberosity, proximal media tibia, 
or trochanteric fossa of the femur
2. Make a small nick skin incision
3. Insert either an 18–20-gauge 
hypodermic needle, a spinal needle, 
or a small bone marrow needle
4. Secure with tape and bandage
1. Avoid growth plates
2. Use needle proportional to 
bone size to avoid trauma
3. Bone infection is rare
Modified from Schaer, M., 1989. General principles of fluid therapy. Vet. Clin. North. Am. 19,203.

72 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
12 Contraindications for fluid therapy
Fluid treatment is not always vital to the patient’s care in some 
circumstances. Congestive heart failure is the most common 
such condition in patients. In this condition, the patient may 
develop congestion since the heart is not able to pump the 
quantity it currently has presented to it efficiently. However, 
fluid treatment is not completely contraindicated in cases of 
heart disease. In some circumstances, it may be necessary to 
utilize fluid therapy sparingly since there may be concurrent 
dehydration or a requirement for medicines to be adminis -
tered at a constant rate to correct heart disease. In such pa -
tients, hypotonic maintenance crystalloids or less frequently, 
D5W is suggested. Fluid therapy should be administered to 
patients with congestive heart failure, with meticulous at -
tention given to vital signs, urine output, and CVP (Pellicori 
et  al., 2015). The other condition where fluid therapy may 
not be required is when the patient has already been drink -
ing sufficient amounts of water and is normally hydrated. 
In this condition, fluid therapy may cause dilution of blood 
compartment components, renal medullary solute washout, 
or progression of pulmonary edema if occult cardiac disease 
exists. Even in this condition, however, fluid therapy may be 
permitted if diuresis is suggested because of the ingestion of 
a toxic substance or if a medicine must be injected by con -
stant rate infusion.
13 Discontinuation of fluid therapy
Discontinuing fluid therapy is as crucial as introducing fluid 
therapy. The majority of the time, fluid therapy should not 
be stopped abruptly, particularly if the patient is getting high 
flow rates. Fluid treatment may alter the solute gradient in the 
kidney while it is being administered (i.e., renal medullary 
solute washout). If fluid treatment is suddenly discontinued, 
the patient may not be capable of concentrating urine well 
and may continue to lose inordinate amounts of fluid in the 
urine for many days. This could be a major problem if the pa-
tient is also not consuming sufficient amounts of water, which 
may result in dehydration. Fluid treatment needs to be gradu-
ally discontinued for the patient. In an ideal condition, fluid 
treatment should be reduced to less than maintenance for a 
minimum of 24 h before the actual cessation of fluid therapy. 
However, it is not always practical to employ this strategy. 
The patient must have access to enough water if fluid treat-
ment must be abruptly stopped, and the owner should be kept 
informed of the patient’s additional water needs over the fol-
lowing few days. As mentioned throughout, the overall view 
described here is not intended to be thorough and exceptions 
to several of the “thumb rules” described here do exist.
14 Conclusion
Fluid management is essential for many dog- and cat-  
related medical issues. It is highly patient specific and af -
fected by several factors. Based on the patient’s condition, 
the fluid choice for a specific patient could differ during 
therapy. The use of fluids is essential to several aspects of 
small animal practice. Fluids are employed as a supportive 
strategy in surgical patients, as a source of nutrition in hos-
pitals, and as the mainstay of therapy in severely ill pets, 
giving them a varied role. Strategies for fluid therapy should 
be adjusted to each patient’s unique clinical situation and 
take into account apparent signs of vasoplegia, hypoperfu -
sion, cardiac failure, or hypoalbuminemia. Balanced crys -
talloid solutions are indeed the cornerstone of fluid therapy, 
even though caution is required to control edema formation. 
All these recommendations are intended to help the doctor 
prioritize goals, select suitable fluids and rates of adminis -
tration and evaluate the effectiveness of therapy on the pa -
tient. The learner needs to understand how fluid therapy is 
dynamic and highly individualized for each patient. It can 
be advantageous to have a connection with a referral facil -
ity for counseling because fluid management can be highly 
personalized in complex circumstances. Current fluid ad -
ministration dogma is being called into question by ongoing 
research, especially when it comes to rates for administra -
tion under anesthesia. Fluid administration in veterinary pa-
tients is a topic that has received little investigation and few 
evidence-based recommendations.

Maintenance of fluids, electrolytes, and acid–base therapy in dogs and cats  Chapter | 5  73

75

Chapter 6
Collection, preservation processing, and 
dispatch of samples for disease diagnosis 
in dogs and cats
1 Introduction
The collection of suitable and ideal samples is the account-
ability of the laboratory, even though the actual collection 
process is often carried out by persons who are not part of 
the laboratory staff. The healthcare provider may collect a 
sample in a clinic or farm setting. The laboratory can help 
to safeguard good samples by providing collection infor -
mation to healthcare personnel at the collection site, mak -
ing sure that proper containers and collection supplies are 
available, defining a good labeling system, and checking all 
samples carefully when they arrive in the laboratory.
The following considerations should be given while 
gathering samples for laboratory diagnosis.
● Serum samples should be collected in pairs when se -
rodiagnosis is required (about 2 mL sera). Two serum 
samples should be taken: one at the beginning of the dis-
ease and one after it has subsided (3–4 weeks), ideally 
on the 21st day.
● Urine samples should be collected and sent to the labo -
ratory as soon as possible for examination. Keeping it in 
the refrigerator will preserve the urine sample for 2–4 h.
● All the samples should be collected in leakproof glass or 
plastic bottles.
● Clinical examination always plays a very important role 
in disease diagnosis (Figs. 1–3).
● If death is reported, the postmortem examination should 
be conducted at the earliest as putrefied materials are 
unfit for laboratory examination. A detailed postmortem 
report should be attached along with the samples col -
lected during the postmortem.
● All the impression smears before packing should be 
fixed in methanol for 1–5 min unless otherwise specified.
● In case of outbreaks, try to collect materials from as 
many animals (5–6 or more) as possible at the height of 
body temperature/clinical signs.
2 Collection and preservation of 
specimen for histopathology examination
● Representative tissue/samples (tissue showing gross 
morbid samples along with normal tissue) should be 
collected for examination.
● Study of any neoplastic growth could be best studied by 
histopathology (Fig. 4).
● Sharp knife should be used for the cutting of the tissue 
samples.
● Collect the tissues directly in fixatives.
● Size of tissues should not be more than 1 cm for histopa-
thology examination for proper fixation in 10% formalin.
● Hollow organs should be taken on paper to avoid 
shrinkage.
● Hard organs like tumor tissues, liver, kidney, etc., should 
be cut carefully and collected along with the capsule.
● Tissue should be kept in fixatives for 24–48 h. before 
processing. The volume of fixatives added should be 10 
times the volume of tissues.
● Fixatives serve to harden the tissues by coagulating the 
cell protein, which allows easy manipulation of tissues.
● It prevents autolysis and putrefaction of the samples.
● An ideal fixative should preserve the architecture of the 
tissues and prevents shrinkage.
● The volume of the fixative should be 10 times the vol -
ume of the tissue/sample.
Common fixatives
1. 10% formalin:
40% formaldehyde—100 mL 
Distilled tap water—900 mL
2. Formal saline:
40% formaldehyde—100 mL
Sodium chloride—9 g
Distilled tap water—900 mL

76 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
3. Neutral buffered formaldehyde:
40% formaldehyde—100 mL
Distilled tap water—100 mL
Sodium dihydrogen phosphate monohydrate—4 g
Disodium hydrogen phosphate anhydrous—6.5 g
3 Collection and preservation of 
specimen for bacteriological examination
● Collect the tissue under sterile condition.
● Materials collected for bacteriological examination 
should be kept at refrigeration temperature (4°C) in case 
of delay of transportation. If a viral etiology is suspected 
the material can be stored at −20°C to −80°C.
● Use the new knife/blade/scalpel/spatula or sanitize the 
same on flame or in boiling water before use.
● Surface of the tissue should be sterilized by a hot spatula 
before the collection of the samples.
FIG. 1 A female cat arrived in the hospital for emergency treatment as 
she met an automobile accident.
FIG. 2 Image showing the occurrence of the corneal ulcer in dog.
FIG. 3 A cat visited to the hospital for a clinical examination.
FIG. 4 Image showing cauliflower-like pedunculated tumorous growth, 
suggestive of canine venereal tumor.

Samples for disease diagnosis in dogs and cats  Chapter | 6  77
● Cut the surface of the tissue and try to collect the sample 
from the inner side of the tissue (tissue with less envi -
ronmental exposure).
● Specimens should be collected directly in media, i.e., 
nutrient broth, peptone water, normal saline, or PBS.
● Seal pack and transport the material to the laboratory in 
ice/under refrigeration condition as soon as possible.
4 Collection and preservation of 
specimen for virological examination
● Collect the tissue under sterile condition.
● Body fluids/blood should be collected in the sterilized 
syringe or pasture pipette.
● Tissues should be preserved in buffered glycerine (PBS 
pH 7.2%–5% and glycerine—50%).
● Avoid samples in glycerine in sensitive viruses, e.g., ca-
nine distemper or parvovirus infection.
● Seal pack, mark and transport the material to the labo -
ratory in ice/under refrigeration condition as soon as 
possible.
● The collected biological specimens should be trans -
ported on ice to the nearest laboratory as early as 
possible.
5 Collection and preservation of 
specimen for toxicological examination
● Collect the stomach and/or intestinal content for toxico-
logical study.
● In the suspected cases of poisoning, the stomach and in-
testinal contents should be sent after proper ligation at 
both ends and sent in ice to avoid putrefaction.
● Liver, kidney, and heart blood also can consider ideal 
samples for collection.
● Urine samples should be collected in clean glass jars.
● Avoid any kind of preservatives as they can interfere 
with the results.
● Collect the samples in ice/refrigeration instead.
● Seal, label, and transport to the laboratory as soon as 
possible.
● In veterolegal cases, all the specimens must be collected 
in the presence of police.
● Detail of the animals like history, signs, lesions, treat -
ment, etc., along with the poison suspected should be 
written in a letter which should be attached with samples 
before sanding to the laboratory.
6 Collection procedure of different 
biological material/specimen
Blood: In dogs and cats, blood should be collected 
from the saphenous or radial vein. The site should be 
prepared by removing hair and disinfecting it with 
spirit. Blood is collected by sterile syringe. In postmor -
tem cases, blood is collected from the right ventricle. 
For serological studies, the serum is separated by al -
lowing the blood to clot, keeping the syringe in a slant -
ing position. After complete separation, the serum is 
transferred to a sterile vial. For hematological studies, 
blood is not allowed to clot by using an anticoagulant 
(sodium citrate or EDTA). One part of the anticoagu -
lant is added to nine parts of the blood. Examination of 
blood samples provides a sufficient idea for health con-
dition of the animal. For example, an increased neutro -
phil count gives a fair idea of any infectious condition 
(Fig. 5).
Feces: Samples for examination of parasitic eggs or coc-
cidial oocysts are collected from the rectum or at the 
time of defecation.
Urine: It should be collected at the time of micturition 
or obtained with the help of a clean and sterile catheter. 
It can be examined to study various pathological condi-
tions like hematuria ( Fig. 6A and B), hemoglobinuria, 
cellular cast depositions, etc. (Fig. 7).
Pus: Smear is made on a clean glass slide. For cul -
tural examination, it should be obtained directly from 
the abscess in a sterile container, or a sterile swab is 
used.
Nasal/throat/uterine discharges : Samples should be 
collected on sterile cotton swabs, and then placed in 
sterile screw cap test tubes.
Exudates/transudates and body fluids : Collection 
has to be made with the help of sterile pipettes or sy -
ringes and to be dispatched in leakproof sterile screw 
cap containers.
FIG. 5 Microscopic image of blood sample of dog showing RBCs and 
neutrophils.

78 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
Tissue, blood, and exudates smears : Tissue smears 
are to be prepared from cut surfaces of organs and fixed 
over a flame. Blood/exudates smears are drawn as thin 
film and fixed over a flame or in methyl alcohol.
Skin scrapping: Cases like dermatitis to be studied by 
skin scarping to come into the conclusion, i.e., parasitic 
dermatitis, bacterial dermatitis or allergic dermatitis, 
etc. (Figs. 8 and 9).
7 Processing and dispatch of material
Frequently, samples are collected outside the laboratory and 
must be transported for subsequent processing and testing. 
Transport may be for a short distance, but sometimes a dis-
tant clinic or collection site requires the use of vehicles or 
airplanes. In addition, it may be necessary for the laboratory 
to ship samples to referral laboratories. In all cases,  transport 
FIG. 6 (A) Urine sample of a dog suspected for hematuria. (B): Microscopic examination of urine of the above sample showed numerous of RBCs 
(HPF), suggestive of hematuria.
FIG. 7 Microscopic image of urine sample of dog showing an abundance 
of epithelial cells.
 FIG. 8 A dog affected with severe dermatitis.

Samples for disease diagnosis in dogs and cats  Chapter | 6  79
must be managed carefully to maintain the integrity of the 
sample, giving attention to temperature, preservation needs, 
special transport containers, and time limitations. It is also 
important to ensure the safety of those handling the material 
before, during, and after transport.
All the types of samples have specific packaging in -
structions and labeling requirements depending on their 
classification. All potentially hazardous material requires 
triple packaging.
1. Primary container: it is a tube or vial containing the 
sample; it is made of glass, metal, or plastic. It must 
have a leakproof seal; if necessary, it can be wrapped 
with waterproof tape. The tube or vial must be labeled 
with a permanent marker.
2. Secondary container: it is a watertight polyethylene 
box intended to protect the primary container. It is sup -
plied with cardboard or bubble-wrap, or a vial holder in 
which several primary containers can be placed to pro -
tect them. Absorbent material (gauze, absorbent paper) 
must be added in a sufficient quantity to absorb the fluid 
completely in case of breakage.
3. Outer container: it is a strengthened cardboard box used 
to protect the secondary container. Both the secondary 
and outer containers are reusable as long as they are in -
tact, but old labels must be removed.
● Describe the clinical signs, lesions, tentative di -
agnosis, and treatment given to the animal in your 
letter. Also mention the type of test you wanted to 
be conducted in the laboratory, with your tentative 
diagnosis.
● Write the correct address on the letter as well as on 
the parcel, preferably with a pin code, if the material 
is sent via post.
● Mark the parcel by using terms like “Biological 
Material,” “Handle with care,” “Glass material,” 
“Fragile,” and “This side up” to avoid damage to the 
parcel. Also, mark the side to be kept on the upper 
side with arrows.
● Seal the container so that it does not leak in tran -
sit. Keep adequate material like thermocol, etc., in 
the parcel which will save the material from outside 
pressure/jerks.
● Use dry ice if available, otherwise, ice pack can be 
used.
● In the veterolegal cases, the material should be sent 
to the forensic laboratory.
● A copy of the detailed postmortem report should 
also be sent to the forensic laboratory.
● All the containers should be packed with cloth 
and sealed with sealing wax and should preferably 
be sent through a person to avoid any breakage in 
transit.
8 Essential pathological tests for 
diagnosis of disease in dogs and cats
8.1 Hematology
It is a very important clinical test that should be done be -
fore providing treatment for surgical procedures in dogs and 
cats. It provides the recent blood picture in detail that helps 
clinicians to decide their treatment protocol.
8.2 Postmortem examination
A systematic and thorough examination of carcasses for the 
study of the gross pathological lesions with an objective to 
ascertain the cause of death is called a necropsy or postmor-
tem examination. It is one of the most valuable, effective, 
and cheap diagnostic techniques available.
8.3 Serology
Diagnostic serology attempts to relate a disease condition 
to rising antibody titers. Serology for disease monitoring 
is performed to evaluate a dog’s and cat’s health program 
and disease diagnosis. ELISA is a widely applicable and 
accepted test routinely used nowadays for diagnosis and 
confirmation of infectious disease.
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay:
● It can be used for the diagnosis of bacterial, viral, and 
parasitic diseases.
● A large number of samples can be tested at a time 
simultaneously.
FIG. 9 The abdominal area of a dog showing severe dermatitis.

80 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
● It is widely used as it is the most sensitive and specific.
● In this assay, the use of monoclonal antibody increases 
specifically.
● The use of automated dispensing, washing, and photo -
metric methods reduces the time.
8.4 Molecular diagnosis
Molecular diagnostics are increasingly used to guide patient 
management, from diagnosis to treatment, particularly in 
the fields of cancer, infectious disease, and congenital ab -
normalities. The increased demand for genetic and genomic 
information has led to the rapid expansion of molecular 
techniques within clinical laboratories. PCR (polymerase 
chain reaction) is now a common and often indispensable 
technique used in the molecular diagnosis of diseases in 
dogs and cats.
8.5 PCR
The polymerase chain reaction (PCR) is a method widely 
used to rapidly make millions to billions of copies (com -
plete or partial) of a specific DNA sample, allowing scien -
tists to take a very small sample of DNA and amplify it (or 
a part of it) to a large enough amount to study in detail. In 
this technique, DNA is denatured at 90–98°C into two seg-
ments through a deannealing process. The second step is 
annealing, in this step, the reaction temperature is lowered 
to 50–65°C (122–149°F) for 20–40  s, allowing the anneal -
ing of the primers to each of the single-stranded DNA tem-
plates. Two different primers are typically included in the 
reaction mixture: one for each of the two single-stranded 
complements containing the target region. The primers are 
single-stranded sequences themselves, but are much shorter 
than the length of the target region, complementing only 
very short sequences at the 3 ′ end of each strand. The last 
step is called elongation or extension. In this step, the DNA 
polymerase synthesizes a new DNA strand complementary 
to the DNA template strand by adding free dNTPs from the 
reaction mixture that is complementary to the template in 
the 5 ′-to-3′ direction, condensing the 5 ′-phosphate group 
of the dNTPs with the 3 ′-hydroxy group at the end of the 
nascent (elongating) DNA strand. The temperature at this 
step depends on the DNA polymerase used; the optimum 
activity temperature for the thermostable DNA polymerase 
of Taq polymerase is approximately 75–80°C (167–176°F).
8.6 Reverse transcriptase RT-PCR
Many clinically important viruses that cause serious dis -
eases in dogs and cats have genomes composed of RNA. 
RT-PCR is useful for detecting such viruses, e.g., ca -
nine distemper, parvovirus infection, feline pan leukope -
nia rabies, etc. RT-PCR may also be used to detect other 
 microorganisms ( bacteria, parasites, and fungi) by target -
ing their rRNA. This approach is better than the detection 
of DNA, as the presence of RNA is more likely associated 
with the presence of viable organisms. Reverse transcrip -
tase PCR (RT-PCR) is a variation of the polymerase chain 
reaction that amplifies target RNA. The addition of reverse 
transcriptase (RT) enzyme prior to PCR makes it possible to 
amplify and detect RNA targets. Reverse transcriptase en -
zyme transcribes the template RNA and forms complemen-
tary DNA (cDNA). Single-stranded cDNA is converted into 
double-stranded DNA using DNA polymerase. These DNA 
molecules can now be used as templates for a PCR reaction.
8.7 Real-time polymerase chain reaction  
(real-time PCR, or qPCR)
It is a laboratory technique of molecular biology based on 
the polymerase chain reaction (PCR). It monitors the ampli-
fication of a targeted DNA molecule during the PCR (i.e., in 
real time), not at its end, as in conventional PCR. Real-time 
PCR can be used quantitatively (quantitative real-time PCR) 
and semiquantitatively (i.e., above/below a certain amount 
of DNA molecules) (semiquantitative real-time PCR).
The PCR process generally consists of a series of tem -
perature changes that are repeated 25–50 times. These 
cycles normally consist of three stages: the first, at around 
95°C, allows the separation of the nucleic acid’s double 
chain; the second, at a temperature of around 50–60°C, al -
lows the binding of the primers with the DNA template; 
the third, at between 68°C and 72°C, facilitates the polym -
erization carried out by the DNA polymerase. Due to the 
small size of the fragments, the last step is usually omitted 
in this type of PCR as the enzyme is able to replicate the 
DNA amplicon during the change between the alignment 
stage and the denaturing stage. In addition, in four-step 
PCR the fluorescence is measured during short tempera -
ture phases lasting only a few seconds in each cycle, with 
a temperature of, for example, 80°C, to reduce the signal 
caused by the presence of primer dimers when a nonspe -
cific dye is used. The temperatures and the timings used for 
each cycle depend on a wide variety of parameters, such as 
the enzyme used to synthesize the DNA, the concentration 
of divalent ions and deoxyribonucleotide triphosphates 
(dNTPs) in the reaction, and the bonding temperature of 
the primers.
8.8 Cytopathology
It deals with the interpretation of cells from an animal’s 
body that either exfoliate/desquamate spontaneously 
from the epithelial surface or are obtained from organs/
tissues through biopsy. It is useful for diagnosis and 
prognosis of neoplasms, identification of benign neo -
plasms, and diagnosis of infectious diseases cytogenetics.

Samples for disease diagnosis in dogs and cats  Chapter | 6  81
Cytopathological diagnosis can be performed through two 
methods. 1. Exfoliative cytopathology and 2. Interventional 
cytopathology.
1. Exfoliative cytopathology: it includes examination and 
interpretations of cells that spontaneously shed off from 
the epithelial surface in body cavities of body fluids. 
Cells obtained from scraping, brushing, and/or washing 
of mucosal surface are also included in the exfoliative 
cytopathologic diagnosis.
2. Interventional cytopathology/biopsy: in this samples 
for the study were obtained from aspiration of surgical 
procedures. FNAC (fine-needle aspiration cytology) is 
one of the biopsies that are useful in palpable lesions 
of animals. In this technique, a thin needle is inserted 
into an area of abnormal-appearing tissue or body fluid 
to collect the sample which is further examined under a 
microscope after applying a suitable stain. It is used to 
examine swellings and lumps that could be cancerous. 
For known tumors, samples are taken for further studies. 
It is also done to establish the effect of prior treatment. 
It is also used to investigate an organ or tissue that is not 
in its original form, state, or functioning.
8.9 Histopathology
It is a branch of pathology that concerns with demonstra -
tion of minute structural alterations in tissues as results of 
disease. It is useful in establishing the pathogenesis and pa-
thology of any diseases caused by bacteria, viruses, para -
sites, fungi, toxins, etc. In some cases, the tissues from dead 
animals are the only available material for laboratory diag -
nosis. The histopathological procedures produce permanent 
slides, which can be stored for a long period, and one cannot 
manipulate the findings. Therefore, it is considered the most 
reliable technique. The procedure includes dehydration and 
clears the formalin-fixed (10%) tissue in acetone and ben -
zene, respectively, followed by wax impregnation, molding, 
section cutting and staining by hematoxylin and eosin stain.

83

Chapter 7
Necropsy procedure and basic laboratory 
methods in dogs and cats
1 Necropsy procedure
Examination of dead body by systematic dissection is called 
necropsy or postmortem examination. Performing a through 
PM examination requires a systemic and logistic approach, 
adequate time, and equipments. There are several reasons 
to perform a postmortem, but the most important reason is 
to determine the cause of death or the changes produced by 
diseases. However, the other reasons include confirming a 
clinical diagnosis, to obtain samples for laboratory investi -
gations, to assess the effect of treatment, to collect evidences 
in vetero-legal cases, or to prevent further spread and deaths.
Postmortem examination should be conducted only after 
getting consent from the owner, accompanied by a signed re-
quest form. It is also vitally important to obtain from the owner 
about details of anamnesis including identification, full clinical 
illness previous conditions, therapeutic and preventive mea-
sures adopted, and date and time of death. Before beginning a 
postmortem, read the history carefully, with this information, 
one can pay special attention to the organs which have given 
clinical signs of abnormality. As lesions are encountered, make 
a note of them. The history of the dog is important in interpret-
ing the results obtained, the information provided by the owner 
or person requesting postmortem, helps in postmortem exami-
nation and recording of lesions to make a conclusive diagnosis.
Under ideal circumstances, the animal should be sub -
mitted as soon as possible after death. Ideally, the autopsy 
should be performed immediately after the animal’s death 
to minimize postmortem tissue damage. If a period of time 
must elapse prior to submission, the animal should be kept 
cold, but not frozen. Basic personal protective equipments 
should be used for safety like disposable gloves, aprons, 
gum boots, head cover, antiseptics, etc.
A thorough knowledge of normal anatomy is critical in dis-
tinguishing lesions from normal variations. Lesions are classified 
by their characteristics: location, distribution, size, shape, color, 
and consistency. Findings are documented, either in writing, 
photographs, or both. The interpretation of gross lesions begins 
with the observation and characterization of abnormal findings. 
All the abnormalities in terms of distribution (focal, multifocal, 
diffuse), shape, color (discolored, bluishness, greenish), weight 
(heavy or lighter), size (shrinkage, enlarged, atrophied), consis-
tency (fluid, soft, firm, hard), odor (foul), or severity (mild, mod-
erate, severe) along with other parameters need to be recorded.
In addition, it is advisable to take as many samples as 
possible from the cadaver, and depending on the tentative 
findings, this approach would allow sequential complemen-
tary analyses. Identifying the underlying cause of death can 
help prevent mortality in nearby dogs, so it is important to 
continue the investigation of the immediate cause of death 
and to identify, ideally, the underlying causes.
1.1 Postmortem procedure
Start the PM procedure by removing the collars, bandages, and 
other materials (if any) and then weighing the animal. Before 
opening the body, carefully examine all external structures 
and surfaces like hair coat, skin, mucous membrane, natural 
orifices, discharges, burns, ectoparasites, wounds, trauma, 
etc. The body should be examined to note the state of nutri-
tion, postmortem change (like rigor mortis and algor mortis), 
and possible discoloration or anemia. Eyes, ears, anus, vulva, 
mouth, nares, etc., should be specifically examined for the 
presence of blood and any other lesion. Then place the dog car-
cass with its back on the PM table. The head is extended and 
the neck is straightened. Make a deep incision in both axillae 
between the thoracic wall and the forelimbs, reflect the fore-
limbs away from the body wall, and lay them flat to stabilize 
the body in steady distal recumbence. Reflect the pelvic limbs 
by cutting the coxofemoral joint and separate the hind limb. 
Make an incision from the point of symphysis of the mandible 
to the pubis. Separate the skin from the underlying tissue and 
distinguishing marks, wounds, etc., should be noted. Make a 
transverse incision from the midline to the dorsal extent to the 
body cavity. The abdominal cavity is exposed by removing the 
flap of muscle. Examine the diaphragm. Cut the sterna carti-
lage or tip to expose the thoracic cavity. The opening of the 
thoracic and abdominal cavities allows the in situ examination 
of the internal organs without severing the attachments. It al-
lows the detection of anomalies like displacement of organs,

84 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
accumulation fluid (serous, serosangunious, blood, pus, etc.), 
fibrinous or fibrous adhesions, parasites, abscesses, tumors, 
or any other visible modifications. If sampling for bacterial 
culture is to be performed, the thorax and abdomen surface 
should ideally be treated with iodine products before open-
ing both cavities. Carefully open joints to examine abnormal 
synovial fluid, ligaments, and articular cartilage.
Following the necropsy, the most important observations 
are grouped together in a report prior to the conclusion. 
Classically, all organs with macroscopic lesions should be 
collected for laboratory analysis. The precise sample collec-
tion for further tests will vary from case to case.
One of the important aspects of the P.M. examination 
is to determine the date and time of death. Generally, it is 
acquired from the owner of the animal. However, in vetero-
legal cases it has to be determined by the pathologist be -
cause the police and the court of law may like to know it.
However, there are other factors that affect the time of 
death such as environmental temperature, size of the ani -
mal, nutritional state of the animal, etc. (Figs. 1–9).
PROFORMA FOR POST-MORTEM  EXAMINATIONR EPORT
Species ………………… Colour:…………Breed:………Sex:………Age:…………. .
Owner’s Name and Address:……………………………….……………………..
Date and hour of P.M. Examination:…………………………………………………
By whom sent for examination……………………………………………………….
History (including Date & hour of death):
External Examination:
Condition of the body:
Rigor mortis:
Eyes:
Natural orifices:
Visible mucus membrane:
Any other abnormalities (describe wounds, bruise,d ischarge etc. if any):
Internal Examination:
Larynx and trachea:
Pleural cavity and lungs:
Pericardium and heart:
Peritoneal cavity:
Esophagus:
Stomach,a bomasum:
Intestine:
Urinary organ:
Genital organ:
Brain and Spinal cord:
Musculoskeletal organs:
Lymph node: 
Mammary gland:
Morbid specimen collected:
Post-Mortem Diagnosis-
Place:                                                                                             Signature

Necropsy and laboratory techniques in dogs and cats  Chapter | 7  85
FIG. 1 A dog carcass being prepared for postmortem examination.
FIG.  2 Showing necropsy procedure of a dog with open thoracic and 
abdominal cavity. The visceral organs removed for recording lesions.
FIG. 3 Stomach cut opened to examine the mucous membrane, showing 
hemorrhagic gastritis.
FIG.  4 Showing increased straw-colored pericardial fluid in the heart 
pericardial space.
FIG. 5 Showing congested and highly enlarged liver.
FIG. 6 Showing marbling appearance in the apical lobe of lung.

86 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
2 Basic laboratory diagnostic 
procedures
Apart from clinical examinations, in many cases the final 
diagnosis of an animal disease is dependent upon a labo -
ratory test. A basic laboratory procedure involves testing 
of a sample of blood, urine, or other substances collected 
from the animal body. The modern veterinary diagnostic 
laboratory performs specific organ function tests (liver, 
kidney), histochemical analyses, biopsies, etc. Laboratory 
tests are often part of a routine checkup in well-managed 
dogs with the aim to look for internal physiological changes 
taking place inside the body. But most of the time, labora -
tory tests can help to determine a diagnosis, plan treatment, 
check the progress of treatment, or monitor the disease with 
time. Thus, effective and accurate diagnosis is of prime 
importance for clinical care, pathogenesis, prevention, and 
control.
The different laboratory procedures that are commonly 
applied in the diagnosis of diseases, in general, in dogs and 
cats are the same. The different laboratory procedures are:
2.1 Blood examination
Blood tests are used to count blood cells or examine cell 
morphology, proteins, or other substances in the blood. 
Blood testing is one of the most common types of laboratory 
tests. Complete blood cell count (CBC) is an examination 
of blood and plasma for packed cell volume (PCV), hemo -
globin percentage (Hb.%), total leucocyte count (TLC), 
total erythrocyte count (TEC), differential leucocyte count 
(DLC), erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR), etc. A CBC 
becomes essential when the animal is showing symptoms of 
fever, vomiting, diarrhea, weakness, loss of appetite, or any 
such changes. The hemogram obtained from performing a 
complete blood count provides a complete blood picture of 
a patient.
Site for collection of blood : Venous blood is collected 
from femoral, saphenous, or tibial vein.
General consideration:
1. Blood should be collected when the animal is at rest and 
without undue excitement to avoid alteration in the he -
mogram and some blood chemistry values.
2. Serum rather than plasma is preferred for most chemical 
analyses as anticoagulants may interfere.
Procedure for collection of blood:
i. Clip the hairs from the site of blood collection. 
ii. Apply antiseptic (ethanol/tincture of iodine) over the 
site.
iii. Raise the vein by pressure.
iv. Insert the needle into the vein and collect the blood in a 
dry syringe for the required quantity of blood (approx. 
2 mL).
FIG.  8 Showing section of kidneys with clear demarcation of cortical 
and medullary area.
FIG.  9 Showing dog urinary bladder distended with urine due to 
retention.
FIG. 7 Showing contracted kidneys with surface granularity suggestive 
of chronic glomerulonephritis.

Necropsy and laboratory techniques in dogs and cats  Chapter | 7  87
v. Disengage the needle and transfer blood from syringe to 
anticoagulant containing the vial. Mix the blood using 
rotational movements in the vials.
Commonly used anticoagulants: EDTA (K or Na salt) @ 
10–20 mg/10 mL of blood or 1  mL of 1% solution dried at 
room temperature. 
Commonly used dyes in staining of blood smears 
are: Leishman’s stain, Giemsa stain, or Wright’s stain. 
Leishman’s stain is good for routine hematological proce -
dures (Figs. 10 and 11).
2.1.1 Hemoglobin estimation
A hemoglobin test measures the amount of hemoglobin 
in the blood. Hemoglobin is found inside red blood cells 
that carry oxygen to different body’s organs and tissues. 
If a hemoglobin test reveals that a dog’s hemoglobin level 
is lower than normal, it means that your dog is suffer -
ing from anemia. It is usually done through Sahli’s acid 
hematin method or autoanalyzer. The basic principle in -
volved includes hemoglobin conversion to acid hematin 
using dilute hydrochloric acid and matching the developed 
color with a comparator/standard colorimeter. The value 
of hemoglobin decreases in case of poor nutrition, canine 
distemper, tick-borne diseases, bone marrow disease, in -
testinal bleeding, etc. 2.1.2 Packed cell volume (PCV) estimation
The packed cell volume is the measure of the ratio of the 
volume occupied by the red cells to the volume of whole 
blood in a sample of blood. It is also known as the hemato-
crit test and is done to diagnose polycythemia, dehydration, 
or anemia in affected dogs. Packed cell volume represents a 
number of RBCs/unit of blood. When anticoagulated blood 
is centrifuged at a standard speed, erythrocytes, which are 
heavier than white cells and plasma, will settle down at the 
bottom. Thus, PCV is the volume of red cells expressed as a 
percentage of whole blood.
PCV can be calculated as Hb. (%) × 3 or TEC (millions) × 6.
PCV less than normal indicates anemia while more than 
normal indicates hemoconcentration/polycythemia.
Normal plasma is straw colored while
i. deep yellow is indicative of jaundice,
ii. pale plasma is indicative of excessive blood loss and 
bone marrow depression,
iii. reddish is indicative of hemolysis, and
iv. creamy top is indicative of lipemia (Fig. 12).
2.1.3 Erythrocyte sedimentation rate (ESR) 
estimation
The ESR test indirectly measures the presence of inflam -
mation in the body. If an ESR test shows that a dog’s red 
blood cells sink faster than normal, it may mean he is suf -
fering from some inflammatory condition. But an ESR 
test alone cannot diagnose what condition is causing the 
FIG. 10 Showing blood smear prepared from a drop of blood for micro-
scopic examination.
FIG. 11 Showing a hemato-analyzer to be used in blood analysis.

88 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
 inflammation. Change in the shape and count of RBCs may 
affect the ESR. It is a nonspecific test to determine the in -
tensity of the disease process in the body. Normal ESR does 
not exclude the possibility of disease.
The distance that the erythrocytes fall during a given pe-
riod of time is measured. The results are expressed as a fall 
of RBCs in mm/h.
Values in dog and cat—1 mm/h
i. Increased ESR : Acute generalized infections, neo -
plasms, tissue injury, canine distemper, infectious ca -
nine hepatitis, bone fractures, etc.
ii. Decreased ESR: Liver disease, poor nutrition, immature 
RBCs.
2.1.4 Total erythrocyte count (TEC) estimation
The results of an RBC count can be used to help diagnose 
blood-related conditions, such as iron deficiency anemia. A 
low RBC count could also indicate a vitamin B6, B12, or 
folate deficiency.
Accurate dilution of a measured quantity of blood with a 
fluid that is isotonic with the blood and counts erythrocytes 
in the counting chamber. The blood specimen is diluted 
(usually in a 1:200 ratio) with the help of RBC diluting fluid 
which preserves and fixes the red blood cells.
Polycythemia (increased TEC with a corresponding in -
crease in HB and PCV): Dehydration, shock, burns, high 
altitude, chronic lung and heart disease, physiological, neo-
natal, renal tumor, cobalt toxicity, etc.
Oligocythemia (anemia): (Decrease below normal in 
TEC, Hb, and PCV): Chronic hemorrhages, bloodsucking 
parasites, deficiency of Fe, Cu, pyridoxine, riboflavin.
2.1.5 Total leukocyte count (TLC) 
determination
Thus, the total number of leukocytes in peripheral blood in 
a given unit of blood is the total leukocyte count. TLC deter-
mination is usually done through hemocytometer (Neubauer 
chamber). The cells are counted under low-power magnifi-
cation (×10) in four corner large squares (each is divided 
into 16 small squares) by following the exclusion principle 
of cells counting along the line (Fig. 13).
Calculation:
TLC mm
Cell counted dilution
depth
No of mm
/
:
.
.
3
20 12 0
10 01
4
/g32
/g117/g11/g12
/g117/g11/g12
22
50
counted
Sumo f white blood cells in squares
/g11/g12
/g32/g117 .
2.2 Differential leucocyte count (DLC)
The differential white cell count is the determination of the 
different types of white blood cells or leucocytes present 
in the blood. The WBCs exist in two forms, viz., granulo -
cytes and agranulocytes. Granulocytes are further classified 
as eosinophil, basophil, and neutrophil, while agranulocytes 
show lymphocytes and monocytes.
FIG. 12 Showing packed cell volume with upper plasma, middle buffy 
coat, and bottom RBC.
FIG. 13 Naeuber’s chamber meant for blood cell count purpose.

Necropsy and laboratory techniques in dogs and cats  Chapter | 7  89
The differential leucocyte count is done by counting dif-
ferent 100 leucocytes in an oil immersion field. However, 
the distribution of leucocytes in the smear is checked ini -
tially on high power. The counting is done on the feathered 
edge of the blood smear. The site where RBCs remain scat-
tered but neither scarcely populated and also not in large 
clumps is preferred for counting. The counting is done by 
the Battlement method. Here, counting is started from the 
periphery of the selected site for about three fields then 
move inwards at a right angle toward the middle portion for 
about three fields, again move straight to the edge and then 
move upwards making parallel lines (Figs. 14 and 15).
2.3 Interpretation of DLC
Leukopenia: (Decrease in absolute count of leukocytes): 
Canine distemper, feline panleukopenia, infectious canine 
hepatitis.
Neutropenia: (Decrease in absolute count of neutrophils): 
Overwhelming bacterial/viral infections, shock, bone mar -
row depression, deficiency of vitamin B12 and folic acid.
Eosinopenia: (Decrease in absolute count of eo -
sinophils): Stress, intoxications, trauma. Lymphopenia: 
(Decrease in absolute count of lymphocytes): Infectious 
canine hepatitis, canine distemper, immune suppressive 
drugs, and chronic enteric disease.
Leukocytosis: (Increase in absolute count of leuko -
cytes): Infections, acute blood loss.
Neutrophilia: (Increase in absolute count of Europhiles): 
Inflammation, trauma, neoplasia, localized suppurative 
processes.
Lymphocytosis: (Increase in absolute count of lympho -
cytes): Chronic infections, lymphadenitis/lymphangitis.
Eosinophilia: (Increase in absolute count of eosino -
phils): Parasitism, allergies.
Monocytosis: (Increase in absolute count of monocytes): 
All chronic supportive diseases, granulomatous conditions, 
stress.
Basophilia: (Increase in absolute count of basophils): 
Associated with eosinophilia, e.g., heartworms, chronic re-
spiratory disease, adrenocorticism in dogs.
FIG. 14 Microscopic view of a blood smear showing RBCs and WBCs 
in higher magnification.
FIG.  15 Microscopic view of a blood smear showing different blood 
cells.
Normal hemogram
Hb. (gm/dL) PCV (%) TEC (×106/μL) ESR (mm/h)
12–18 (15) 37–54 (45) 6–9 (6.8) 5–25/h
MCV (μ3) MCH (μμg) MCHC (%) TLC (×103) N (%) L (%) M (%) E (%) B (%)
60–77 (70) 19–25 (23) 32–36 (34) 5.6–19 (19.7) 60–75 12–30 3–9 2–10 Rare

90 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
PROFORMA FOR BLOOD EXAMINATION REPORT 
Sr. No……………..                                                                      Date……………………… 
Owner name………..                                                                Case no……………………. 
Species………                                                                             Age………….                            
Sex…………… 
Clinician…………..                                                                    Section……………. 
Test required………….                                               
Anticoagulant used……………………….  
Time of collection………….                                        Ti me of receiving……………….. 
1. TLC                                                   /mm3
2. DLC 
Neutrophilia                                 % 
Lymphocyte              % 
Eosinophil              %   
Basophil              % 
Monocyte              % 
3. Reticulocytes      / mm3
4. Hemoglobin    gm% 
5. E.S.R.      mm fall in Ist  hour  
6. Total Platelets                                      / mm3
7. Absolute Eosinophil                 / mm3
8. PCV                                                   %           
9. TEC                                    Million/ mm3
10. MCV 
11. MCH 
12. MCHC 
13. Haemoprotozoans 
Remarks:…………………………………………………………………  
3 Urine analysis
This body fluid can be easily obtained from most species 
of animals. A urinalysis can include a variety of tests that 
detect and measure various compounds that pass through 
urine using a single sample of urine. Urinalysis is the physi-
cal, chemical, and microscopic examination of urine. A 
critical examination of urine is one of the most important 
of all veterinary laboratory diagnostic procedures. Urine is 
not only altered by disease occurring in the kidney but may 
also occur due to extra-renal conditions that may be of di -
agnostic significance.
Analysis of urine employs a wide array of techniques 
ranging from simple test tube reactions to very sophisti -
cated ones such as flow cytometry and computer analysis.
3.1 Collection of urine
Preservatives—Toluene/formalin/thymol/chloroform/boric 
acid/metaphosphoric acid.
Procedure:
i. Collect the urine sample from animals as it voids. It is 
advisable to clean the vulva to avoid any contamination.

Necropsy and laboratory techniques in dogs and cats  Chapter | 7  91
ii. An early morning sample from the house-trained pets is 
of more diagnostic significance.
iii. Collect the midstream urine sample as the first stream 
urine may be contaminated with cellular debris, leuko-
cyte, and exudates that are flushed from the urethra.
iv. At least 100 mL of urine must be collected.
v. For bacterial cultures and sensitivity testing, the sample 
should be collected in a sterile container using aseptic 
precautions either using a catheter or directly from the 
bladder in small animals, e.g., dog/cats.
vi. Collection is advisable before any fluid consumption 
(as it dilutes the urine) or meals (the sample is likely to 
have more sugar and protein than the morning sample).
vii. Examine the sample as early as possible. Delay will 
increase the alkalinity of urine (urea, ammonia) and 
formed elements like cells and casts will degenerate.
The examination of urine can be divided into four parts:
i. Physical/visual examination of urine. 
ii. Chemical examination of urine.
iii. Microscopical examination.
iv. Cultural examination.
3.2 Physical examination of urine
The urine is examined for volume, smell, color, and 
clearness.
(1) V olume—Record the amount of urine produced per day 
by a normal animal.
Increased volume: (Polyuria): Renal failure, diabetes 
mellitus, primary renal glycosuria, chronic pyelonephri-
tis, pyometra, and liver disease.
Decreased volume: (Oliguria): Acute renal failure, fe -
ver, edema, urinary passage obstruction, reduced blood 
pressure.
Normal range of daily urine output in the dog: 0.5–2 (1.0) L.
(2) Color—Record the color of urine by taking the sample 
in a clean transparent tube. Normally urine is yellow/
amber/wheat straw colored and is related to the concen-
tration of urochromes in urine. The depth of urine color 
is also a crude indicator of urine concentration.
(3) Odor—Normal order is urinoid.
(4) Transparency—Observe urine sample in a test tube 
against light. Abnormal transparency: Presence of 
epithelial cells, blood, leukocytes, bacteria, mucus, 
crystals.
3.3 Chemical examination of urine
The routine chemical examination of urine involves qualita-
tive tests for protein, glucose, hemoglobin, ketone bodies, 
and bile pigments. These components are mostly present in 
urine in healthy animals but in amounts undetectable by the 
routine tests. Various pathological conditions increase their 
concentration in urine.
To perform the chemical examination, most clinical 
laboratories use commercially prepared test strips. The 
most frequently performed chemical tests using reagent test 
strips are: Specific gravity, pH, protein, glucose, ketones, 
blood, bile pigments, and bile salts.
Specific gravity: It is a measure of urine concentration. 
It can be measured by urinometer. It is cheap and inexpen -
sive and routinely followed. Normal range of urine specific 
gravity: 1.015–1.045 (Av. 1.025).
pH: Any condition that produces acids or bases in the 
body such as acidosis or alkalosis, or the ingestion of acidic 
or basic foods, can directly affect urine pH. Normal range 
of urine pH: 6.0–7.0. Abnormal reaction in case of cystitis, 
alkalosis, starvation, fever, acidosis, prolonged muscular 
activity.
Protein: When urine protein is elevated, you have a con-
dition called proteinuria. The proteinuria can be detected 
by heat test, Heller’s test, or Robert’s test. The conditions 
that can produce proteinuria include hemoglobinuria, renal 
neoplasm, acute nephritis, pyelonephritis, and polycystic 
kidneys.
Glucose: If present, the condition is called glucosuria. It 
can be tested by Benedict’s test, Fehling’s test, or Clinitest 
reagent tablet. The condition for glycosuria and hyperglyce-
mia: diabetes mellitus, liver diseases, hemorrhage, encepha-
litis, fracture.
Ketones: Ketones are not normally found in the urine. 
Ketonuria can be detected by Rothera’s nitroprusside test. 
Increased value is seen in diabetes mellitus, high fever, and 
starvation (in puppies and kittens), starvation/fasting, and 
impaired liver function.
Blood: The presence of blood in the urine is known as 
hematuria while that of hemoglobin is known as hemoglo -
binuria. Benzidine test and orthotolidine test are used to de-
tect blood in the urine.
Hematuria (urine reddish-cloudy, clear with sediment 
on standing, and contains intact RBCs): Acute nephri -
tis, urolithiasis, cystitis, neoplasms of urogenital tract, 
estrus.
Hemoglobinuria (Urine port-wine/brown/coffee colored 
translucent uniform color without sediment and no intact 
RBCs): Due to excessive hemolysis of erythrocytes and ob-
served in condition, viz., leptospirosis, toxemia due to Cu, 
Hg, and sulfonamides.
Bile pigments: The presence of bilirubin in urine can be 
detected by: (i) Foam test, (ii) Gmelin test, (iii) Fouchet’s 
test, and (iv) Icotest (reagent tablets). It is observed in con-
dition, viz., obstructive jaundice, hepatocellular disease, 
e.g., leptospirosis infection, canine hepatitis, cirrhosis tox -
icities, and hepatic neoplasm.

92 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
3.4 Microscopic examination of urine
This test examines urine sample sediments under a mi -
croscope. It can see cells from the urinary tract, blood 
cells, crystals, bacteria, parasites, and cells from tumors. 
Microscopic examination of urine sediment is usually per -
formed in addition to routine procedures. The specimen 
used for microscopic examination should be as fresh as 
possible.
Pour 5–10 mL of midstream urine into a conical bottom 
test tube. Centrifuge it for about 5  min at 2000–3000  rpm. 
Decant the supernatant and resuspend the sediment in the 
residual urine that clings to the bottom of the tube by tap -
ping the tube against a hard surface several times. Place a 
drop of the resuspended sediment on a glass microscope 
slide and place a coverslip over the drop and examine it un-
der the microscope (Figs. 16 and 17).
In healthy dogs, the urine contains small numbers of cells 
and other formed elements from the entire urinary tract, and 
epithelial cells from the kidney, ureter, bladder, and urethra. 
In renal disease, the urine often contains increased numbers 
of substances discharged from an organ that is otherwise ac-
cessible only by biopsy or surgery. A microscopic examina-
tion of urine sediment detects the presence and amounts of 
(i) Organized sediments like blood cells, bacteria and yeast, 
casts, epithelial cells, mucous threads, parasites, sperma -
tozoa and (ii) unorganized sediments like crystals and fat 
droplets (Fig. 18).
3.5 Cultural examination of urine
Diagnosis of bacteriuria in a patient with a suspected uri -
nary tract infection requires a urine culture and sensitivity 
test. A colony count may also be done to determine if sig -
nificant numbers of bacteria are present. Generally, more 
than 100,000 bacteria of single organism per milliliter of 
urine indicate a urinary tract infection. A finding of multiple 
organisms usually reflects specimen contamination.
FIG. 16 Showing centrifuge machine used in microscopic examination 
of urine.
FIG.  17 Showing centrifuge tube with bottom sediments and upper 
supernatants.
FIG. 18 Microscopic view of urine sample showing urinary crystals.

Necropsy and laboratory techniques in dogs and cats  Chapter | 7  93
PROFORMA OF URINE EXAMINATION REPORT 
Sr. No……………..                                                                      Date………………………  
Owner name………..                                                                  Case no……………………. 
Species………                                   Age………….                            Sex…………… 
Clinician…………..                            Section……………. 
Test required………….                                             Specim en:Void/Catheterized/Others 
Time of collection………….                                                Ti me received……………….. 
Physical examination
Volume………………….. 
Colour……………………….. 
Odour……………………… 
Transparency………………… 
Foam test…………………………… 
Chemical examination 
pH…………………………………. 
Specific gravity…………………….  
Albumin/protein………………………………………… 
Glucose/sugar………………………………………………  
Ketone bodies………………………………………………  
Blood……………………………………………………………  
Bile salts……………………………………………………….  
Bile pigments………………………………………………… 
Indican ………………………………………………………….. 
Urobilinogen …………………………………………………… 
Calcium…………………………………………………………  
Microscopic examination  
Epithelial cells…………………………………………type /H.P.F. 
 RBCS… ......................................................................... H.P.F. 
WBCs………………………………………………… H.P.F.  
Pus cells…………………………………………….….H.P.F. 
Casts …………………………………………………. type /H.P.F. 
Micro-organisms……………………………………… H.P.F. 
Parasitic ova ……………………………………….…. H.P.F. 
Spermatozoa……………………………………..…… H.P.F. 
Mucus/mucus threads………………………………… H.P.F. 
Crystals ………………………………………………. ty pe /H.P.F. 
Fat globules…………………………………………… H.P.F.  
Others…………………………………………………. 
Remarks:………………………………………………………………………

94 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
4 Diagnostic cytology
Diagnostic cytology or cytopathology is a specialized di -
agnostic technique to examine individual cells extracted 
from tissues to determine the cause and nature of a dis -
ease. Diagnostic cytology is commonly used to investi -
gate diseases involving a wide range of body sites, often 
to aid in the diagnosis of cancer but also in the diagno -
sis of some infectious diseases and other inflammatory 
conditions. Thus, it can be defined as the study of cells 
that has either exfoliated or are obtained from various 
organs/tissue. Its interpretation is based upon alteration 
in morphology observed in single cells or group of cells. 
Exfoliative cytology involves the study of cells sponta -
neously shed off from epithelial surfaces into the body 
cavity or body fluids, while interventional cytology study 
samples that are obtained by clinical procedures or sur -
gical intervention. It is also known as fine needle aspi -
ration cytology or aspiration biopsy cytology. It is done 
for palpable mass example lymph node, mammary gland, 
thyroid, salivary gland, etc.
4.1 Collection of specimens
The sample can be collected by scrapping the lateral walls 
of the vagina, fresh early morning sputum, and bronchial 
washings. Buccal smears, gastric lavage, fresh catheterized 
urine samples, pericardial, pleural, and peritoneal fluids, 
CSF, semen.
4.2 Fixation of the specimen
All materials for cytological examination must be properly 
fixed to ensure the preservation of cytomorphological de -
tails. Methods of fixing vary depending on the type of stain-
ing employed. Materials are usually wet-fixed for use with 
Papanicolaou or H&E staining. Routine fixatives comprise 
a solution of equal parts of ether and 95% ethanol. 100% 
methanol, 95% denaturated alcohol, or 85% isopropyl alco-
hol may be used. Special purpose fixative may be buffered 
neutral formalin, Bouin’s fluid, and picric acid.
4.3 Papanicolaou staining
It is the method for routine studies. Gives excellent nuclear 
but weak cytoplasmic detail. They do not demonstrate bac-
teria and cytoplasmic changes as well as Romanowsky 
stains. Its procedure is as follows:
i. Fix in 95% alcohol for 15 min.
ii. Rinse in tap water.
iii. Stain in hematoxylin for 1–3 min.
iv. Rinse in tap water.
v. 10 dips in 95% alcohol.
vi. Stain for 1–2 min in Paps stain OG-6.
vii. 10 dips in 95% alcohol.
viii. Stain with EA 65 stain for 2–3 min.
ix. 10 dips twice in 95% alcohol.
x. Keep for 1 min in 100% alcohol.
xi. Put coverslip and examine under microscope.
4.4 Interventional cytopathology
It includes fine needle aspiration cytology (FNAC), imprint 
cytology, and crush smear cytology. Fine-needle aspira -
tion cytology has gained importance in the last 3 decades. 
Almost all fine needle-accessible organs can be aspirated 
for cytological studies. It is used to investigate superficial 
(just under the skin) lumps or masses. In this technique, a 
thin, hollow needle is inserted into the mass to take samples 
of cells that, after being stained, are analyzed under a mi -
croscope. It is safer and less traumatic than an open surgi -
cal biopsy, and significant complications are usually rare, 
depending on the body site. If the lump or suspected tumor 
mass is very small, it might be necessary to use a scanning 
machine to help guide the needle to the right place. This 
may be done by an ultrasound scan or an X-ray of the organ 
(Figs. 19 and 20).
FIG.  19 Cytopathological examination of smear showing lymphoblast 
cells with prominent nucleoli.
FIG. 20 Cytopathological examination showing round cells with vacu -
olated cytoplasm.

Necropsy and laboratory techniques in dogs and cats  Chapter | 7  95
5 Diagnostic histopathology
Diagnostic histopathology is a practice in which patholo -
gists view tissues under a microscope to identify potential 
changes. A histopathologist can view potentially cancerous 
or atypical tissues and aid other medical specialists in mak-
ing diagnoses or assessing the effectiveness of treatments. 
Thus, histopathology is the microscopic examination of tis-
sues to observe pathological alterations. This involves the 
preparation of microscopic slides from tissues for histopa -
thology which includes a collection of morbid tissues from 
biopsy or necropsy, fixation, preparation of sections, stain -
ing, and examination under a microscope.
5.1 Cryo-sectioning/frozen sectioning
A fresh tissue is required for the procedure. The tissue is 
placed in the cryostat which is a microtome enclosed in a 
refrigerated chamber at ( −30°C) but can be operated from 
outside. Sections are then taken after the tissue has been 
hardened and are stained by the rapid H&E method so as to 
give an immediate diagnosis.
5.2 Paraffin embedding technique
Tissue pieces of one cubic cm, thickness are collected from 
organs showing gross morbid changes along with normal 
area. A portion of tissue is trimmed (block) and used for fur-
ther processing. The block with the identification number 
is transferred into a container having fresh fixative. Tissues 
should be kept in a fixative for 24–48 h at room temperature. 
Neutral buffered formaldehyde is the most widely used fixa-
tive because it is compatible with most stains, cost- effective, 
and easily available. Fixative is removed from tissues by 
keeping them overnight in running tap water or washing 
briefly in tap water followed by placing them in 70% al -
cohol. Alcohol removes formalin more rapidly. Thereafter, 
clearing is done in xylene to remove alcohol from the tis -
sues and prepare them for penetration by paraffin during 
embedding. Infiltration and impregnation are done using 
paraffin wax. Embedding is transferring of infiltrated tis -
sue into molten wax and solidifies into a block when cools 
down to room temperature. Microtomes are used for cutting 
thin uniform tissue sections. The section is cut in a (4–5 μm 
thickness) microtome.
5.3 Hematoxylin and eosin staining
i. Clearing—To remove the paraffin by giving three 
changes in xylene for 3 min each.
ii. Rehydrate in ascending grade of alcohol by keeping 
in 100%, 85%, and 70% grade of alcohol for 1  min in 
each, and then in tap water for 30 s.
iii. Stain with hematoxylin for 10 min.
iv. Keep in tap water for 30 s.
v. Few dips in ammonia water.
vi. Keep in tap water for 30 s.
vii. Few dips in acid alcohol.
viii. Keep in tap water for 30 s.
ix. Pass through 70% and 95% alcohol for 1 min each.
x. Stain with eosin for 3–5 min.
xi. Keep in 95% and 100% alcohol for 1 min each.
xii. Clearing in xylene, three changes for 1 min each.
xiii. Examine under a microscope.
xiv. Prepare permanent mounts with the help of mountants 
like DPX or Canada Balsam (Figs. 21–24).
FIG. 21 Showing dog affected with mammary gland tumor.
FIG.  22 Dog affected with mammary gland tumor being prepared for 
biopsy sample collection.

96 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
6 Parasitological examination
The parasitology examination provides laboratory tests of 
protozoa and various parasites (ecto or endoparasite) that 
may cause diseases in the body.
6.1 Examination of mites
The mites are deeply embedded in the host tissue. At the 
time of collection when an attempt is made to separate the 
embedded mites often the damage occurs.
Before going through the process of collection, a scalpel 
or knife blade is sterilized by passing it through a flame and 
then cooled by dipping it in water. For easy collection, the 
edge of the knife should be dipped in acetic acid glycerin. 
For collection, a fold of skin showing lesions is held be -
tween the thumb and forefinger, and the crest of the fold is 
scraped until blood begins to ooze. Here, care must be taken 
to avoid drawing blood. Now transfer scrapings from the 
scalpel, using a rotary motion, into a drop of acetic glycerin 
on a slide. If necessary, add a cover glass and additional 
acetic glycerin and observed under the low power of the 
compound microscope. To discourage the growth of molds, 
add a crystal of thymol.
6.2 Examination of specimens
● For field condition, a simple hand lens of 10 × can be 
used.
● In laboratory condition, a low-power stereoscopic mi -
croscopic is useful.
● Some of the specimens preserved in liquid may be easier 
to examine for surface features if the surface is allowed 
to dry. This type of specimen should not be kept out of 
the liquid preservative for too long. This can be rinsed in 
100% ethanol and dried under a bench lamp or by using 
blotting paper. The magnification of the objective lens 
used for mites is 10× to 40×.
6.3 Examination of fecal sample
A fecal sample should be collected from the rectum of sus-
pected animals. Smaller animals (lamb, kid, dog, and cat) 
can be induced to defecate by inserting a moistened little 
finger into the rectum and gently massaging in a rotator 
motion and then the sample may be collected. Samples 
should be collected in wider mouth screw cap bottles or 
plastic containers with lids. Disposable plastic gloves are 
used for collecting the samples. Each sample should be 
clearly labeled with animal identification, date, and place 
of collection.
Samples can be kept in the refrigerator for up to 
3 weeks without significant changes in the egg counts 
and the morphology of eggs. Collected feces should be 
preserved in 10% formalin for a few days and 70% ethyl 
alcohol may be used for a longer period of preserva -
tion. 10% formalin is prepared by taking formalin (40% 
formaldehyde-10 mL + Water-90 mL).
6.3.1 Gross examination of feces
Feces are examined grossly for the presence of adult worm. 
All the information regarding quantity, color, and presence 
of blood or mucus in feces, and consistency should be noted.
(a) 10–20 g of feces is spread in a large Petri dish for this 
purpose.
(b) Nematodes or segments of tapeworm or immature nem-
atode are searched with the camel hair brush. The para -
sitic stages are identified with or without staining.
FIG.  23 Histopathological view of a mammary gland tumor showing 
calcified material in the stroma.
FIG. 24 Histopathological view of a urinary bladder carcinoma in a dog.

Necropsy and laboratory techniques in dogs and cats  Chapter | 7  97
6.3.2 Microscopic examination of feces
i. Qualitative examination : It is done for knowing the 
kinds of infection without going into intensity. It is help-
ful in comparing the efficacy of anthelmintic, determin-
ing the correct interval between anthelmintic treatment, 
assessing the efficacy of control programs and knowing 
the drug resistance, etc. It is determined by the direct 
smear method, floatation method, sedimentation tech -
nique, and formal-ether method.
ii. Quantitative examination of feces:
Egg counting methods: For accurate information regarding 
severity of infection, egg count methods are very useful by 
estimating eggs per gram (EPG) of feces. 
Stoll’s dilution method: This method is mainly used for 
estimating the number of helminth eggs in feces. It is very 
simpler and needs less special equipment than then other 
techniques.
Mc Master method: The simplest and most effective 
method for determining the number of eggs or oocysts per 
gram of feces is with the help of Mc Master chambers. 
This technique is useful to count the number of eggs or 
larvae of most cestode, nematode, and coccidia in feces. 
Eggs per gram (EPG)  = Number of eggs in one (or two) 
chamber(s) × 100 (or 50).
Boray and Pearson method: This method was described 
by Boray and Pearson and widely used to determine the 
EPG of Fasciola species in the rumen (Fig. 25).
7 Clinical biochemistry
Clinical biochemistry is a part of the laboratory that deals 
with the measurement of chemicals (both natural and un -
natural) in blood, urine, and other body fluids. These test 
results are useful for detecting health problems, determin -
ing prognosis, and guiding the therapy of a patient. Organ-
specific function tests usually performed in animals are:
A. Kidney function tests
1. BUN/NPN—Normal values range from 10 to 30 mg/dL.
2. Creatinine—Normal values range from 1 to 2 mg/dL.
B. Liver function tests
1. Serum bilirubin.
2. SGPT—Serum glutamate pyruvic transaminase.
3. SGOT—Serum glutamic oxaloacetic transaminase.
4. SAP—Serum alkaline phosphatase.
5. LH—Lactic dehydrogenase.
6. SDH—Sorbitol dehydrogenase.
Normal values range
Total bilirubin
Conjugated 
bilirubin Icterus index
0.07–0.61 0.06–0.12 <5
SGPT SGOT SAP LDH SDH
4.8–24 6.2 ± 13 3–16 10–35 2.9–8.2
Total protein  
(g/dL)
Albumin  
(g/dL)
Globulin  
(g/dL) A/G
5.40–7.10 2.30–3.20 2.70–4.40 0.59–1.11
C. Pancreatic function tests
1. Serum amylase—Normal values range in dogs 
185–700 IU/L.
2. Serum lipase—Normal values range in dogs 
13–200 IU/L.
3. SGPT.
4. Serum cholesterol.
5. SAP.
6. Serum calcium.
D. Cardiovascular function tests
1. SGPT.
2. SGOT.
3. LDH—Lactic dehydrogenase.
4. CPK—Creatinine phosphokinase.
E. Blood glucose level
Hyperglycemia: Diabetes mellitus, hyperactivity of thy -
roid, pituitary, or adrenal gland, Intracranial diseases like 
meningitis, encephalitis, drug-induced ex: thiazide diuret -
ics, steroids, ACTH, thyroid extracts. 
Hypoglycemia: Hypothyroidism, hypopituitarism, se -
vere exercise, starvation.
FIG. 25 Stained blood smear showing Theileria sp. inside RBC.

98 SECTION | A  Introduction of diseases
Uremia is a measure of renal function. The causes may 
be: prolonged vomiting, severe diarrhea, ulcerative colitis, 
glomerulonephritis, congenital cystic kidneys, and enlarge-
ment of prostate. Decreased serum urea levels could be due 
to pregnancy, intravenous infusion, low protein intake, and 
severe liver diseases.
Increased serum creatinine levels  are seen in renal 
failure, dehydration, congestive heart failure, shock, dia -
betes mellitus, calculi blocking the ureters, or neoplasms 
compressing the ureters.
Increase in serum total proteins occurs in : 
Dehydration, multiple myeloma, chronic infections, chronic 
liver disease, and autoimmune diseases.
Decrease in serum total proteins may result from : 
Heavy losses of proteins in urine as in nephritic syndrome, pro-
tein undernutrition, intestinal malabsorption, protein- losing 
enteropathy, shock, burns, crush injuries, and hemorrhage.
Decrease in serum albumin may occur in: Protein un-
dernutrition, intestinal malabsorption, protein-losing enter -
opathy, liver disease, wasting diseases, nephritic syndrome, 
and hemodilution.
Rise in serum calcium is seen in: Hyperparathyroidism, 
hypervitaminosis D, multiple myeloma, extensive meta -
static involvement of bones, and polycythemia.
Calcium level decreases in: Hypoparathyroidism, rick-
ets, osteomalacia, steatorrhoea, nephritic syndrome, renal 
failure, acute pancreatitis, starvation.
Serum inorganic phosphorus rises  in: 
Hypervitaminosis D, hypoparathyroidism, and renal failure, 
during the healing of fractures.
Serum inorganic phosphorus falls  in: Rickets, osteo -
malacia, steatorrhoea, hyperparathyroidism, and renal tubu-
lar acidosis, after injection of insulin.
Increase in serum albumin may occur in: Dehydration 
due to hemoconcentration.
Increased serum globulin  may be in: Multiple my -
eloma, chronic liver disease, or chronic infections.
Serum globulin may decrease  due to: Hemodilution 
shock, burns, hemorrhage, etc.
Elevation in the serum levels of ALT : Liver disease, 
cirrhosis, carcinoma of the liver, myocardial infarction.
Note: ALT is the more liver-specific enzyme although 
both AST and ALT are raised in liver diseases.
7.1 Hyperbilirubinemia
A. Unconjugated hyperbilirubinemia (Retention jaundice):
i. Hemolytic (Prehepatic jaundice) due to: Increased 
hemolysis, abnormal RBC, e.g., in spherocytosis, 
G-6-p dehydrogenase deficiency, incompatible blood 
transfusion, organisms, e.g., plasmodium, etc., inef -
fective erythropoiesis, e.g., in pernicious anemia.
B. Nonhemolytic (Hepatic) due to: (i) Impaired hepatic up-
take, physiological jaundice of newborn. Particularly in 
premature infants not having a fully developed micro -
somal conjugating enzyme system.
ii. Conjugated hyperbilirubinemia (Regurgitation 
jaundice):
Due to regurgitation into circulation of conjugated bilirubin 
which would normally pass along the bilirubin system. 
8 Bacteriological examination
The bacteriological examination is a method of collecting 
samples and analyzing these samples to estimate the type 
and number of bacteria present. The primary purpose is to 
assist veterinarians and pet owners in providing optimal 
health care by identifying those bacteria causing disease 
and by determining the antimicrobial agents to which the 
bacteria may respond in vivo.
For proper isolation and identification of bacteria, it 
needs to be cultured by growing the organism in an artifi -
cial medium. Artificial culture media generally provides a 
necessary source of elements, energy, nutrients, and a pH of 
about 7.2. For routine purposes, many of these nutrients are 
supplied by aqueous extracts of meat and peptone, which 
is a product of digested protein. Some bacterial species are 
able to grow under a wide range of conditions: but others 
are very exacting. If more than one species or types of or -
ganism are present, then each of them needs to be carefully 
separated or isolated in pure culture. For this, it needs spe -
cial media enriched with specific inorganic salts or particu-
lar growth factors. There are two broad groups of media: 
(A) Liquid media and (B) Solid media. “ agar-agar” is the 
most common solidifying agent used in the preparation of 
artificial media but it does not add to the nutritive proper -
ties of the medium. Most bacteriological agar melts at about 
95°C and solidifies at about 42°C.
8.1 Isolation of pure culture by streak plate 
method
A pure culture is possible to get by transferring a single col-
ony of bacteria into a sterile medium. The term pure culture 
denotes that all the cells in the culture had a common origin 
and are simply descendants of the single cell.
Procedure
1. Melt and cool nutrient agar at 45–50°C. Pour 15–20 mL 
melted.
2. Take this nutrient agar into separate Petri dishes.
3. Let it solidify.
4. Take a loopful of mixed culture and streak it over a par-
ticular area. Sterile the loop by flaming and then draw 
parallel lines to the fresh surface of the medium. Repeat 
the process several times. The inoculums should be de -
rived from the most distal part of the immediately pre -
ceding strokes.

Necropsy and laboratory techniques in dogs and cats  Chapter | 7  99
5. Sterilize the loop, and allow cooling it, between each 
sequence.
6. Incubate at 37°C for 18–24 h in an inverted position.
7. Observe the plates for the presence of isolated or solitary 
colonies. Study the morphology and staining reaction.
8.2 Gram staining of bacteria
This method of classification is most useful; therefore, it 
is the most important staining technique employed for the 
diagnostic identification of various organisms. Certain bac-
teria when treated with one of the basic para-rosaniline dyes 
such as methyl violet, crystal violet, or gentian violet and 
then with iodine “fix” the stain, so that subsequent treatment 
with a decolorizing agent like alcohol or acetone does not 
remove the color. These bacteria are called “Gram positive” 
and are stained in violet color. Other organisms, however, 
are decolorized and can be counter-stained with neutral red. 
These are termed as “Gram negative” and are stained pink.
Procedure
1. Take a loopful of broth culture (or urine, sputum, pus, 
etc.) with the inoculating wire and spread thinly on a 
glass slide, and let it dry.
2. Fix the smear by over the flame.
3. Flood the slide with crystal violet solution and allow it 
to act for about 30 s.
4. Pour off the stain and pour on the iodine solution so that 
it washes away the dye. Cover the slide with fresh iodine 
and allow acting for about 30 s.
5. Wash with acetone and 95% alcohol (30:70 parts) until 
the smear ceases to lose color.
6. Wash with water.
7. Counterstain for 1 min.
8. Wash and dry with blotting paper.
9. Observe the slide under oil immersion.
8.3 Antibiotic sensitivity test by disc method
It is a method to test the ability of the organism to grow on 
artificial nutrient media containing different antibiotic and 
chemotherapeutic agents in different concentrations.
Method
1. Inoculate 5 mL of sterile nutrient broth with the test organism.
2. Incubate overnight at 37°C.
3. Pour 0.5 mL of broth culture on the surface of the sterile 
nutrient agar plate. The inoculums are well spread over 
the agar surface.
4. Inoculated plates are dried in an incubator for 10  min at 
37°C.
5. Put the antibiotic discs over the inoculated plates at 
equal distances.
6. Incubate this plate at 37°C overnight in an inverted posi-
tion and read the result the next day.
Quantify the diameter of the zone of inhibition made by 
different antibiotic discs and witness grades of sensitivity 
as sensitive, intermediate, and resistant by comparing the 
diameters of the inhibition zones with critical zone diam -
eters in published tables. 
9 Fungal examination
Fungal infections are relatively common in cats and dogs 
and include conditions such as ringworm. Ringworm can 
cause hair loss, itching, and a skin rash, but in most cases, 
it is treatable and not life threatening. The importance of 
fungal infections in cats and dogs has increased over the 
last decades.
9.1 Sample collection
Collect skin scraping from the inflamed margin of the 
growth with a curved disposable scalpel. Clean the lesion 
thoroughly with 70% alcohol. If vesicles are present, the 
tops should be removed with fine scissors and sent for ex -
amination. Alternatively, apply waterproof transparent vinyl 
adhesive tape firmly to the affected area and peel it off and 
apply to a sterile glass microscope slide for transport to the 
laboratory. This is usually used in the case of dermatophytes 
and yeasts. Nail clippings should be taken from the distal 
border with the help of clippers. Hairs should be removed 
by plucking with epilating forceps and never by cutting as 
the base of the hair shaft around the follicle which is most 
likely to harbor the fungus fails to be collected. In the case 
of sputum, 3-day collection is done. Swabbing needs to be 
done in case of exudates or pus. Rub the swab firmly over 
the lesion proper collection.
The collected sample should be allowed to dry out to 
prevent the overgrowth of saprophytic bacteria and fungi 
that occur if moisture is retained by holding these speci -
mens in air-tight glass bottles. Packeting in the black paper 
fold is most suitable.
9.2 Lactophenol cotton blue staining of fungi in 
wet mounts
Procedure:
1. Put a drop of 95% alcohol on the slide. Gently tease out 
a fragment of the culture in the alcohol with needles. 
When it is satisfactorily spread, let most of the alcohol 
evaporate and then add a drop of stain.
2. Apply a coverslip, and exert gentle pressure to flatten 
the fungal fragments.
3. Remove excess stain with the help of a piece of blotting 
paper. Let it penetrate for a few minutes, but differentia-
tion may go on improving for up to 24 h. For permanent 
preparations, seal the edges with nail polish.

Clinical diseases of dogs 
and cats
Section B

103

Chapter 8
Behavioral disorders of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
Animals react differently to the same stimuli. Individual 
behavioral variations may result from a variety of circum -
stances. Among these influences include hereditary traits, 
prenatal dam modification, animal behavior at different 
periods of development, especially during the neonatal 
and socializing phases, maturational events, and the ef -
ficient functioning of the animal’s organ systems ( Kaiser 
and Sachser, 2005; Weinstock, 2008; Camps et al., 2019 ). 
When discussing the proper organ function in animals, it 
is affected by an array of medical complications that can 
cause behavioral problems directly or indirectly in our pet 
animals, and these complications include those that alter or 
eliminate external perception (e.g., blindness), information 
perception (e.g., a brain tumor), stress reactions owing to 
pain, and those that drastically alter internal processes due 
to hormonal or neurological issues (Camps et al., 2019; Haq 
et al., 2022). In general, behavioral disorders in animals are 
defined as abnormally unpleasant behavior observed by the 
animal owner that can be harmful to people or other animals 
and that can either directly or indirectly impair the patient’s 
well-being. Other ailments in companion animals, such as 
aggression, abnormal behaviors associated with pain, and 
behavioral issues associated with the vomeronasal organ 
and heart failure, must also be taken into consideration dur-
ing a clinical diagnosis ( Camps et al., 2019). For the treat-
ment and management of behavioral disorders in companion 
animals, veterinarians combine pharmacological interven -
tions, such as the use of tricyclic antidepressants, selective 
serotonin reuptake inhibitors, phenothiazines, benzodiaz -
epines, and occasionally pheromone-based therapies, with 
behavioral modification therapies or techniques ( Camps 
et al., 2019; Haq et al., 2022). A list of drugs that may help 
companion animals having behavioral issues is mentioned 
in (Table 1). Numerous contributing factors are thought to 
have an impact on the utilization of psychopharmaceutical 
treatment for aberrant behaviors. They include ideas held 
by veterinary teams and dog owners about what constitutes 
“normal” and acceptable canine behavior in addition to 
worries about cost, safety, and ease of administration. There 
is little published research on the use of pharmaceutical 
treatment to address unwanted behaviors in companion ani-
mals receiving routine veterinary care, despite the general 
consensus that greater knowledge on veterinary behavioral 
psychopharmacology is needed.
2 Noise-related anxiety
Canine and feline anxiety reactions to noisy stimuli are 
sometimes misdiagnosed with separation anxiety disor -
der. For example, urinating when the owner is not there 
is not always indicative of separation anxiety disorder; it 
can also happen in reaction to unpleasant loud stimulation. 
Fireworks, thunderstorms, and gunshots are the most often 
mentioned noise phobias. As a result of these unpleasant 
noise stimulations, a typical dog may become more sensi -
tive to the added stress of being alone ( Sherman and Mills, 
2008; Blackwell et  al., 2013 ). It is critical to thoroughly 
examine the relationship between primary and secondary 
issues. Therefore, to reduce the risk of delay or insufficient 
action, patients with one condition should undergo routine 
screening for the other. The severity of a patient’s distress 
response to noise can range from minor behaviors like pant-
ing, hiding, hyperactivity, or attempts to flee to more severe 
ones like destructiveness and self-trauma ( Sherman and 
Mills, 2008). As a result, many dog owners turn to veteri -
narians, animal behaviorists, and dog trainers for assistance. 
Alternatively, they may decide to abandon or put their pets 
to sleep. The majority of dog owners (between 40% and 
50%) believe that their dog is “frightened” of some kind 
of noise ( Sherman and Mills, 2008 ). According to reports, 
dogs that are not exposed to an urban environment, which 
typically entails the sounds of moving vehicles, are more 
likely to display evasive behavior and violent reactions 
(Sherman and Mills, 2008 ). Although it is frequently ad -
dressed poorly or ineffectively, noise sensitivity is a sig -
nificant behavioral issue and a severe welfare concern for 
pet owners. Treatment is usually delayed until problematic 
responses, including panic episodes or numerous stimulus

104 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 reactions, become severe. Animals with these problems 
might seem normal and have a fearless personality at some 
point (McCobb et al., 2001).
Recent studies have assessed the efficacy of various 
treatment plans for different noise sensitivities; however, 
the study designs lacked placebo controls. In combination 
with behavioral modification, clomipramine and alprazolam 
have been used to regulate thunderstorm reactions (Crowell-
Davis et  al., 2003). Phenothiazines are not recommended 
for the general treatment of noise phobia. These drugs make 
the animal sleepy but do not lessen its subjective fear re -
action; in fact, they could make it more fearful ( Sherman 
and Mills, 2008). Products made from pheromones, such as 
dog appeasing pheromone, may also be useful for managing 
crises right away. Pets may still react with fear to unpleas -
ant noises because pheromone products do not sedate the 
animal, but the animal should recover more quickly. This 
is how owners must be notified (Sherman and Mills, 2008).
Long-term modification of the animal’s noise percep -
tion requires systematic desensitization using sound re -
cordings. First, sounds that are similar to the problematic 
stimulus but not exactly the same should be played at a 
 volume that the animal does not find offensive. The volume 
is being gradually turned up. Using a DAP pheromone dif -
fuser during training and playing the recordings for short 
intervals of time rather than for extended durations of time 
might speed up the program ( Sherman and Mills, 2008 ). 
The next phase, known as “counterconditioning,” involves 
encouraging a response that is the opposite of the problem-
atic behavior. This might be a pleasant or soothing exercise 
or a command that requires strict obedience, like “staying 
down.” Counterconditioning is especially helpful for con -
trolling the anxiety-related aspect of the issue. A tricyclic 
antidepressant (TCA) or a selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor (SSRI) may be administered during this period. 
Benzodiazepines are not advised throughout this process 
since they may hinder learning. If the issue is due to exces-
sive attention seeking, this behavior must also be addressed 
by fostering the pet’s independence. The first 4 weeks of this 
procedure should be when clients can expect to see the most 
development. Long-term success requires long-term man -
agement and scheduling regular follow-up conversations 
(Sherman and Mills, 2008). Group courses may encourage 
change, enable effective resource usage, and enable owners 
TABLE 1 Common pharmacological medications for the behavioral disorders.
Drugs Dogs Cats
Alprazolam (BZD) 0.01–0.1 mg/kg, prna–qidb 0.125–0.25 mg/cat, prna–tidc
Diazepam (BZD) 0.5–2 mg/kg, prna 0.2–1 mg/kg, prna to tidc
Buspirone (Azapirone) 0.5–2 mg/kg, o.dd/tidc/day 0.5–1 mg/kg, o.dd–tidc/day
Lorazepam (BZD) 0.025–0.2 mg/kg/day 0.025–0.08 mg/kg, o.da–bide/day
Clorazepate (BZD) 0.5–2.2 mg/kg, prna/tid 0.2–1 mg/kg, o.dd/bide/day
Fluoxetine (SSRI) 1–3 mg/kg/day 0.5–1.5 mg/kg/day
Fluvoxamine (SSRI) 1–2 mg/kg, o.dd–bide/day 0.25–0.5 mg/kg/day
Paroxetine (SSRI) 0.5–2 mg/kg/day 0.25–1 mg/kg/day
Sertraline (SSRI) 1–3 mg/kg/day or bide 0.5–1.5 mg/kg/day
Amitriptyline (TCAs) 1–4 mg/kg, bide 0.5–2 mg/kg/day
Clomipramine (TCAs) 1–3 mg/kg, bide 0.25–1 mg/kg/day
Doxepin (TCAs) 3–5 mg/kg, bide–tidc 0.5–1 mg/kg, o.dd–bide/day
Imipramine (TCAs) 1–4 mg/kg, o.dd–bide/day 0.5–1 mg/kg, o.dd–bide/day
Propranolol (β-blocker) 0.2–3 mg/kg, prna–bide 0.2–1 mg/kg, tidc
Selegiline (monoamine oxidase inhibitor) 0.5–1 mg/kg/day (morning) 0.5–1 mg/kg/day (morning)
Trazodone hydrochloride (SARIs) 3–8 mg/kg, prna–tidc 5–10 mg/kg or 50 mg single dose per cat 
per os
a Prn = as needed.
b qid = four times a day.
c tid = three times daily.
d o.d = once daily.
e bid = twice daily.

Behavioral disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 8  105
to share their issues with others who are experiencing a sim-
ilar level of difficulty. Reexposure therapy is advised annu-
ally. This can be managed in real life by reminding people 
to repeat the behavioral training, similar to how annual vac-
cination reminders are sent out (Sherman and Mills, 2008). 
Fig. 1 shows a brief illustration of noise-related anxiety in 
companion animals.
3 Aggression
With around 70% of the cases, aggression is the most 
prevalent issue in referral clinics in North America, and 
around 5 million people are hospitalized each year in the 
USA alone for the treatment of dog bites. With the ex -
ception of predation, most kinds of aggression involve an 
activity that increases distance (i.e., the dog is attempt -
ing to actively increase the distance between itself and 
the stimulus). There are several aggressive behaviors with 
a variety of causes; nevertheless, in the majority of cases, 
fear, anxiety, conflict, genetics, and learned reactions are 
responsible (Fig. 2). In certain instances, the behavior may 
be pathological. Aggression develops as a result of early 
development (prenatal and postnatal), socialization, and 
prior experience. Threatening conduct or destructive at -
tacks are referred to as aggression, and it can take many 
forms, from minute adjustments in body position, expres -
sions on the face, and vocalizations, to biting. Because their 
physiologic condition influences their decision-making, 
readily stimulated dogs are more likely to become aggres -
sive (i.e., flee or fight). The pet’s fear and excitement must 
first be controlled by avoiding situations or keeping below 
the point at which aggressiveness could start. A combina -
tion of reward-based training, behavior products that can 
help to better manage the pet, and medications to help 
achieve a behavioral state most conducive to new learning 
is required to successfully change the behavior to achieve 
desired results and counter-condition the pet to the stimuli 
that incite aggression (Fig. 2). The practitioner must evalu-
ate the danger of damage before treating aggressiveness 
(https://www.msdvetmanual.com/behavior/normal-social-
behavior-andbehavioral-problems-of-domestic-animals/
behavioral-problems-of-dogs).
To guarantee initial safety, all triggers that could cause 
aggressiveness should be precisely recognized. Prognosis 
FIG. 1 Illustration of noise-related anxiety in dogs.
FIG. 2 Aggression in dogs, their causes, and management.

106 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
predictability is a crucial factor in creating a stimulus gra -
dient for therapy as well as preventing additional events. 
Additionally, it is crucial to consider the signaling, environ-
ment, history, and target of the aggressiveness when deter -
mining if the issue can be handled safely and efficiently. 
Another element is the type of aggression; some may be 
addressed and handled, while others need to be prevented. 
The doctor must also evaluate the owner’s capacity to safely 
and effectively prevent the issue. The prognosis is worsened 
by unpredictable aggression, aggression that occurs during 
largely benign interactions, aggression that involves targets 
that cannot reasonably be protected from the aggressive dog 
(like young children or other household pets), aggression 
that is committed by a large dog, or aggression that is com-
mitted in an unrestrained manner. Identification of any med-
ical disease that may contribute to or cause aggressiveness 
is important since it will affect the diagnosis, prognosis, 
and course of therapy. Establishing a schedule of controlled 
interactions in which the dog is not provided something it 
values (or desires) until it sits is a typical way to start to 
reduce anxiety, enhance communication and training, teach 
self-control, and let the dog determine its consequences and 
outcomes ( https://www.msdvetmanual.com/behavior/nor-
mal-social-behavior-and-behavioral-problems-of-domes -
tic-animals/behavioral-problems-of-dogs, MSD Veterinary 
Manual, 2022).
It is critical to determine which behaviors must be 
learned to achieve desired results during exposure training 
because the ultimate goal is to properly expose the dog to 
regulated levels of stimuli while achieving calm and happy 
outcomes. For instance, if issues emerge indoors, the dog 
might initially need to learn the commands for a concen -
trated sit, calm down, and a mat command. It can also be 
necessary to train a come or recall command and a drop 
or give the command. The best stimuli exposure options 
include loose-leash walking, backing up, or turning and 
walking away. Before the owners go to a progressive stim -
ulus, these behaviors need to be reliably and consistently 
acquired in a variety of situations with little distraction 
(https://www.msdvetmanual.com/behavior/normal-social-
behavior-and-behavioral-problems-of-domestic-animals/
behavioral-problems-of-dogs , MSD Veterinary Manual, 
2022). By applying pressure to three aggressive Great 
Danes, the research on using pressure to suppress canine 
aggression has been investigated ( Williams and Borchelt, 
2003). In a large wooden box, each animal was separately 
restrained. The dogs were placed in a standing position 
and blanketed with approximately 275  kg of triple-cleaned 
oats, leaving the head and neck exposed. Each dog was 
given more intense exposure to stimuli (either humans or 
other dogs) to which they were reactive. When the dog was 
restrained, all of its hostile behaviors quickly subsided, 
and it displayed calm behavior even when the stimulus in -
tensity was at its greatest ( Williams and Borchelt, 2003 ). 
The researchers concluded that tactile pressure may be a 
key tool in behavior modification after observing a lower 
heart rate reading than the baseline data ( Williams et al., 
2003).
4 Generalized anxiety disorder (GAD)
Both human and animal species struggle with this syndrome 
(Crowell-Davis, 2009; Ferdowsian et al., 2012; Craske and 
Stein, 2016; Haq et al., 2022 ), but in humans, it lasts for 
6 months with unrelenting, observable anxiety ( Craske 
and Stein, 2016 ; Haq et  al., 2022). Regardless of the cir -
cumstance, dogs with GAD exhibit persistent or almost 
persistent indicators of anxiety and concern, which lower 
their quality of life and daily functioning ( Crowell-Davis, 
2009; Haq et al., 2022 ). To diagnose GAD, patients must 
have experienced persistent anxiety symptoms in their dogs 
or cats for at least 2 to 3  months. These symptoms include 
shaking, vocalizing, peeing, defecating, drooling, hiding, 
and destructiveness ( Fig.  3) ( Crowell-Davis, 2009 ). The 
patient develops a propensity for behavioral issues, which 
is primarily influenced by genetic predisposition (demon -
strated in dogs by the existence of a fearful phenotype), 
environmental factors, and early life experiences (such as 
inadequate socialization, subpar nursing care, and negative 
experiences during the early stages of life) (Tiira and Lohi, 
2015; Zapata et  al., 2016 ; Craske et  al., 2017 ; Sarviaho 
et al., 2019). As a result of all these factors, pets are more 
likely to acquire GAD, which has a significant detrimental 
impact on the quality of life for affected animals (Blackwell 
et al., 2013). As anxiety develops, stress levels rise and can 
be measured by serum cortisol levels (Marques et al., 2010; 
Franzini de Souza et al., 2017 ; Wormald et al., 2017). As a 
result, GAD has serious emotional and physical effects on 
the person who has it, prompting the need to seek therapeu-
tic alternatives. Psychopharmacological therapies, which 
may be required in addition to behavioral modification ther-
apy, may safeguard well-being or facilitate behavioral con-
trol (Fig. 3) (Mills, 2003; Herron et al., 2008 ; Ibanez and 
Anzola, 2009; Karagiannis et al., 2015 ). The usage of nu -
merous medications, including alprazolam, clomipramine, 
and diazepam, is one of the pharmacological therapies 
(Haq, 2017; Crowell-Davis, 2009). For canines and felines 
that exhibit chronic anxiety, medication is a crucial com -
ponent of treatment. Azapirone, a selective serotonin reup -
take inhibitor or a serotonin and norepinephrine reuptake 
inhibitor, is beneficial for the majority of patients (Crowell-
Davis, 2009). To make a long-lasting change in the pet’s 
underlying mental condition, these drugs are given to the 
animal every day for a few weeks. Since benzodiazepines 
have a high risk of addiction, they should not be used exten-
sively (Crowell-Davis, 2009). Imepitoin has been demon -
strated to have an antistress effect when used to treat GAD 
in dogs at a dose of around 20  mg/kg orally twice a day.

Behavioral disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 8  107
The drug decreased serum cortisol levels, which indicated 
less stress (Forster et al., 2020). Imepitoin has been shown 
to have anxiolytic and anticonvulsant effects (Rundfeldt and 
Löscher, 2014) and to have benzodiazepine-like effects in 
a number of common anxiety models ( Engel et al., 2018 ). 
It has also been shown to have anxiolytic effects in dogs 
(McPeake and Mills, 2017 ). Trazodone hydrochloride was 
used as an adjunctive agent in conjunction with other be -
havioral medications to treat a variety of anxiety problems 
in dogs, according to Gruen and Sherman (2008). Their re-
search showed that the medication was well tolerated over a 
broad dosing range and improved behavioral calming when 
given regularly or as needed. Adjunctive agents are required 
to improve pharmacologic treatment for dogs with anxiety 
disorders who do not respond well enough to standard treat-
ment protocols as well as for dogs that respond to treatment 
at first but later relapse. This method may also be benefi -
cial in more complex cases and for dogs with a variety of 
behavioral issues. The patient’s health state and clinical 
symptoms may have an impact on the choice of appropriate 
adjunctive medication. The phenylpiperazine medication 
family includes the triazolopyridine derivative trazodone 
hydrochloride (Gruen and Sherman, 2008 ). Due to its pri -
mary pharmacologic mechanism of action, which antago -
nizes serotonin 2A receptors, and its secondary mechanism, 
which inhibits serotonin reuptake, it is classified as a SARI 
(serotonin antagonist and reuptake inhibitor). Trazodone 
also has agonistic actions on serotonin 1 receptors, as does 
its active metabolite, m-chlorophenylpiperazine (m-CPP). 
Recent research suggests that trazodone’s mechanism of ac-
tion as an antidepressant and antianxiety drug is  different 
from that of SSRIs, TCAs, and benzodiazepines. It also 
suggests that trazodone may increase serotonin concentra -
tions by attenuating the inhibitory tone of aminobutyric 
acid neurotransmitters in the cerebral cortex ( Gruen and 
Sherman, 2008). Stevens et al. (2016) reported a significant 
improvement in the cat’s signs of anxiety during transport 
and veterinary examination-related anxiety. Trazodone hy -
drochloride (50 mg orally per cat) was used in a single dose 
by the authors.
In livestock animals, like pigs and cattle with anxiety 
symptoms, the application of pressure to their bodies has 
shown induction of relaxation and sleep. Based on this, the 
use of pressure wraps (Thundershirt) for the treatment of 
dogs suffering from GAD (generalized anxiety disorder) 
and SAD (separation anxiety disorder) is being used along 
with medical and behavioral modification therapy that has 
revealed a decrease in elevated heart rates and abnormal 
stress behaviors like tongue flicking and yawning ( King 
et al., 2014).
5 Obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
The most crippling behavioral disorder is OCD, which has 
a long history of study. Obsessive-compulsive disorder 
(OCD) in companion animals is characterized by stereotyp-
ical and ritualistic behavior. OCD in dogs manifests itself in 
a variety of ways, including spinning, circling, tail chasing, 
trying to suck the flank (common in the Doberman breed of 
dogs), fly nibbling, fence jumping, self-mutilation, wind or 
hair smacking, pica, including feces consumption, staring 
and making noises, aggression, and cloth sucking or biting 
FIG. 3 Schematic figure of a generalized anxiety disorder (GAD) in pets.

108 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
(Haq, 2017; Haq et al., 2022; Overall and Dunham, 2002 ). 
OCD in felines may be related to social and environmental 
stress, and in cats, indications of self-mutilation, obsessive 
grooming, tail-chasing, and sucking or biting on wool or 
fabric are also observed ( Overall and Dunham, 2002; Haq, 
2017; Haq et al., 2022). Attention-seeking behavior, separa-
tion anxiety, generalized anxiety, and hyperactivity disor -
ders must be differentiated from OCD symptoms. In dogs, 
chromosome 7 (breed Doberman) has been found to sig -
nificantly increase the risk of developing OCD, indicating 
a hereditary component to OCD in dogs ( Fig. 4). A gene 
essential for the healthy growth of glutamate receptors is 
located at the chromosome 7 locus ( Fig. 4), and its failure 
contributes to the manifestation of obsessive-compulsive 
disorder (Overall, 1997; Overall and Dunham, 2002 ; Haq 
et al., 2022 ). In the same part of the brain where OCD is 
present in human sufferers, the hippocampus, canine chro -
mosome 7 is expressed in dogs. More proof that people and 
dogs exhibit symptoms and react to treatments in similar 
ways is provided by the fact that similar pathways are im -
plicated in pharmacological treatment responses in both 
species. Investigating obsessive-compulsive disorder in 
canines can help researchers create more effective and ef -
ficient treatments for OCD in people ( Haq et  al., 2022 ). 
Miniature bull terriers, Staffordshire bull terriers, and 
German shepherds are the dog breeds most prone to OCD 
(Nuwer, 2012; Overall and Dunham, 2002). Serotonin reup-
take inhibitors combined with cognitive behavioral therapy 
are the initial treatment for OCD ( Haq, 2017; Haq et  al., 
2022; Overall and Dunham, 2002 ). The most efficient 
and often prescribed medications for OCD are tricyclic 
 antidepressants (such as clomipramine and amitriptyline), 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (such as fluoxetine), 
and monoamine oxidase type B (MAO-B) inhibitors (such 
as selegiline) ( Fig. 4). Animals with a history of urine re -
tention or severe, uncontrolled cardiac arrhythmias should 
not be administered TCAs ( Reich et al., 2000 ; Overall and 
Dunham, 2002; Haq et al., 2022 ). Today, an interdisciplin-
ary approach is used for the effective management of ca -
nine dogs with obsessive behavioral disorders. To treat the 
compulsive disorder (specifically tail-chasing behavior) in a 
7-year-old intact male German shepherd mixed-breed dog, 
d’Angelo et al. (2022)  described using an interdisciplinary 
strategy that involved hiring a veterinary behaviorist and 
a rehabilitating dog instructor. Along with this strategy, a 
3-month pharmaceutical intervention utilizing fluoxetine 
and a-S1 casozepine was also carried out. Surprisingly, over 
the course of the next 3 months, medication and behavioral 
management led to the cessation of compulsive tail-chasing 
behavior. The primary protein in cow’s milk is the bioactive 
peptide a-S1 casozepine, which is known for its capacity 
to bind to the GABAA receptor, a pharmacological target 
for substances of the benzodiazepine class that are used to 
treat epilepsy, insomnia, anxiety, and panic disorders. In 
this regard, a-casozepine has been shown in numerous stud-
ies to have anxiolytic and sleep-inducing characteristics in 
a variety of species, including humans. Studies in rats also 
revealed that a-S1 casozepine has anxiolytic effects equiva-
lent to those of diazepam, with the exception that it did not 
cause the disinhibition state that is normally experienced 
following benzodiazepine administration in people ( Violle 
et al., 2006; d’Angelo et al., 2022).
FIG. 4 Schematic figure of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).

Behavioral disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 8  109
6 Separation anxiety disorder (SAD)
This behavioral condition is brought on when a dog or cat is 
left alone at home or is separated from its owner. Symptoms 
of this illness frequently appear when the animal anticipates 
being left alone, and they typically get worse between 30 
and 60 min after the owner departs. Excessive vocalization, 
disruptive behavior, impatience, early urine and feces, ex -
cessive salivation, psychogenic grooming in cats and es -
cape attempts are a few of the clinical indications of SAD 
in pets ( Fig. 5) (Amat et al., 2014 ; Haq, 2017; Haq et al., 
2022). Additionally, cases of vomiting, anorexia, and acral 
lick dermatitis have been recorded ( Haq, 2017; Haq et al., 
2022) (Fig. 5). The owners occasionally describe the dogs’ 
welcoming behavior as “excessively effusive.” According 
to several telephone marketing surveys of pet owners in 
the United States, between 14% and 17% of companion 
dogs who get veterinarian care exhibit signs of separation 
anxiety. According to Guthrie (1999) and Bradshaw et al. 
(2002), at least 20% of dogs in the United Kingdom are 
believed to have separation anxiety, and up to 50% of dogs 
living in the neighborhood may eventually exhibit clini -
cal symptoms. Clients with separation anxiety make up 
20%–40% of caseloads for behavior specialist practitioners 
(Horwitz, 2000; Wright and Nesselrote, 1987). Due to early 
separation from their mother, puppies with this ailment 
are frequently reported to be between 2 and 3  months old. 
Separation anxiety also has a negative effect on the relation-
ship between humans and animals, which can cause owners 
to abandon healthy dogs or decide to put their pets to sleep 
(Amat et al., 2014). One factor that causes SAD in dogs is 
their ability to anticipate the owner’s departure. This ability 
is based on the dog learning the correlation between the ac-
tual departure and a number of signals that go along with it 
and are given by the owner, usually unknowingly, like pick-
ing up the keys and donning a jacket ( Amat et al., 2014 ). 
Giving false departure signals by acting as though you are 
about to go is a tip that is frequently given to owners of dogs 
with separation anxiety disorder. By minimizing the dog’s 
dread and anxiety, this technique aims to diminish the ani -
mal’s anticipation of the owner’s real departure ( Horwitz, 
2002; Takeuchi et  al., 2000 ; Appleby and Pluijmakers, 
2003; Blackwell et  al., 2006 ; Sherman and Mills, 2008 ). 
Therefore, training the dog to endure the owner’s absence is 
the most successful SAD therapy, which is followed by the 
repair of specific problems like destruction, barking, and 
elimination. For the treatment of SAD, a combination of 
behavioral change and medication therapy has shown bet -
ter results (Fig. 5) (Simpson et al., 2007 ; Landsberg et al., 
2008). For the treatment of separation anxiety in dogs, two 
medications, clomipramine and fluoxetine, which are both 
extensively used antidepressants in humans, have received 
FIG. 5 Schematic diagram of separation anxiety disorder in pets.

110 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
approval in the United States ( Simpson et al., 2007 ). Dogs 
with separation anxiety that are left alone lessen their pac -
ing, scratching, and whining when given clomipramine 
at a rate of 1–2  mg/kg every 12  h ( Simpson et  al., 2007 ). 
Clonidine, a drug used to treat hypertension in humans, is 
also used with clomipramine to treat SAD, with behavioral 
benefits shown in dogs (Ogata and Dodman, 2011). A “dog 
appeasing pheromone therapy” administered via an elec -
tric diffuser has been reported to help with SAD symptoms 
in addition to pharmaceutical treatments ( Fig.  5). Dog-
appeasing pheromones are naturally released by the seba -
ceous glands (mammary glands) of nursing bitches shortly 
after parturition. In stressed-out juvenile and adult dogs, the 
vomeronasal organ, which eventually has a calming effect, 
may detect this molecule (Pageat and Gaultier, 2003). When 
the pheromone was dispersed without the owner around, it 
was shown that this therapy, together with behavioral modi-
fication, was just as effective as taking clomipramine and 
had fewer adverse side effects (Kim et al., 2010).
Recently, canine patients with separation anxiety disor-
der are increasingly being treated using pulsed electromag-
netic field (PEMF) devices ( Pankratz et al., 2021 ). Pulsed 
electromagnetic field (PEMF) therapy may complement or 
act as an alternative to medication treatment for SA. Targeted 
PEMF has a long history of usage for treating osteoarthritis 
pain in people and animals, as well as wound repair, edema, 
postoperative pain, and nonunion fractures ( Hattapoglu 
et al., 2019; Zidan et al., 2018 ; Pinna et al., 2013 ; Alvarez 
et al., 2019). Alternating magnetic fields produced by pulse 
generators control neuronal excitability but fall short of the 
threshold for action potential induction. Nitric oxide pro -
duced by PEMF is thought to have antiinflammatory prop -
erties and promote calcium signaling ( Marchionni et  al., 
2006; Grassi et al., 2004). Recently, considerable focus has 
been placed on the possible application of PEMF to men -
tal disorders. In a model of posttraumatic stress, research 
in mice has demonstrated the effectiveness of PEMF in 
lowering anxiety behaviors and boosting neurogenesis in 
the hippocampus ( Alizadeh et  al., 2019 ); however, other 
research has demonstrated no change in anxiety responses 
following electromagnetic field exposure ( Cosquer et  al., 
2005). In humans, PEMF has been demonstrated to have 
immediate mood-improving benefits in depressed people 
(Rohan, 2015; Rohan et al., 2014), as well as longer-lasting 
effects in people with depression that is resistant to therapy 
(Martiny et al., 2010).
A pilot study with 10 dogs with SA was carried out in 
2019 (Gruen and Korman, 2019). For 6 weeks, owners gave 
their dogs PEMF treatments twice daily, answered question-
naires every 2 weeks, and filmed their pets at home alone on 
weeks four and six. Positive findings from owner surveys 
included improvements in all enrolled patients after 4 weeks 
and symptoms being gone in more than half of patients by 
6 weeks. Footage of the dogs alone at home at 4 and 6 weeks 
old revealed an improvement over baseline videos in both 
good behaviors like relaxing and a reduction in undesir -
able ones like pacing and environment orientation ( Gruen 
and Korman, 2019 ). But since this study lacked a control 
group, a more meticulously planned investigation would be 
required to reach conclusions about its effectiveness.
7 Post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD)
Domestic animals, especially military dogs, are prone to 
developing posttraumatic stress disorder. It occurs when 
the subject is exposed to a dreadful condition such as brutal 
personal attacks, tragic events, natural or man-made disas -
ters, or violent conflict ( Fig. 6). Although there are many 
different situations in which domestic dogs might get this 
illness, it is estimated that 650 million army canines (5%) 
returning from the frontlines experience PTSD (Haq, 2017; 
Haq et al., 2022). A dog may get PTSD if he is abandoned 
in the wild, endures maltreatment, loses his owner, or en -
counters a storm or other natural calamity ( Fig.  6). Dogs 
with PTSD may exhibit symptoms such as persistent anxi -
ety, anorexia, unwillingness to urinate, pacing, loss of sleep, 
barking without cause, hiding, trembling or shaking, ag -
gressiveness, panting, uneasiness, being terrified and cling-
ing to their owners, hostility, hopelessness, and being too 
attentive. Canines commonly stop reacting and functioning 
in the military. Some of the most frequent triggers of fear 
that result in trauma, anxiety, and PTSD include thunder 
and fireworks. Any dog with PTSD must undergo difficult 
therapy, which varies depending on the situation. Treatment 
for PTSD involves both medication and behavioral change. 
Dogs do not have the same capacity for memory that people 
do, so with a little assistance from you, your dog can prog -
ress. Positivity and happiness will help your dog cope with 
PTSD. When a dog experiences a frightening scenario, you 
do not want to comfort him. That will just increase her anxi-
ety. Instead, show her you are happy and do not feel sorry 
for her. Teach her to connect the circumstance with posi -
tive things like a hug, a game, some nice words, or a treat 
(https://www.dogsnaturallymagazine.com/ptsd-in-dogs-
and-how-to-manage-it-naturally/, Dogs Naturally, 2022 ). 
As dog owners, we have a tendency to think we are the best 
people to make decisions for our dogs. But when dealing 
with a dog that has PTSD, things are different. Giving your 
dog the opportunity to do what she believes is correct can 
enhance her quality of life and lower her stress levels. Why 
is that relevant? When you go on walks, let your dog choose 
the route rather than leading the way. If your dog seems 
apprehensive, do not insist on bringing them on a car ride. 
Try your best to avoid any stressful situations. Always be 
alert for your dog’s signs of discomfort and provide her the 
freedom to act whatever she pleases ( https://www.dogsnat-
urallymagazine.com/ptsd-in-dogs-and-how-to-manage-it-
naturally/, Dogs Naturally, 2022).

Behavioral disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 8  111
A doctor must write a prescription for anxiolytic medi -
cations such as clomipramine, fluoxetine, and amitripty -
line as well as a behavioral program called desensitization 
(Fig. 6). The drug’s use was discontinued after positive re -
sults in dogs. Desensitization entails introducing the dog to 
the upsetting stimuli gradually. If the noise was the prob -
lem, the animal behaviorist would start by creating it at a 
very low volume. The dog is rewarded with food if it toler-
ates the noise. The sound is delivered in a way that gets 
increasingly louder with each presentation. Additionally, 
regular exercise, playtime, methodical desensitization, and 
positive reinforcement training are all part of the PTSD dog 
behavior plan. PTSD is routinely treated with many of the 
same medications that are used to treat canine SAD ( Haq, 
2017; Haq et al., 2022).
8 Behavior problems and pain
Changes in behavior are the most typical indication of pain 
in animals. Both the loss of typical behavior and the emer -
gence of novel, deviant behaviors are behavioral indicators 
of pain ( Camps et al., 2019 ). The most frequent behaviors 
labeled as “lost typical behaviors” are decreased ambulation 
or activity, less engagement with family members or other 
pets, a sluggish demeanor, decreased hunger, and decreased 
resting habits. Aggression, frightened responses, improper 
elimination, vocalization, changed facial expression, altered 
posture, restlessness, and concealment are the most  typical 
“aberrant behaviors.” Repetitive actions have also been 
linked to pain. From a clinical standpoint, pain should be 
taken into consideration when determining the differential 
diagnosis of aggressive behaviors, fear and phobia reactions 
sleep problems, incontinence in urination, vocalization, and 
repetitive behaviors (Camps et al., 2019).
9 Issues with vomeronasal organ 
and behavior
The VNO (vomeronasal organ, also known as Jacobson’s 
organ), a part of the accessory olfactory tract, is located on 
each side of the nasal septum. The pheromones that travel 
into the environment are detected by the vomeronasal organ, 
and these substances are in charge of changing the behavior 
of animals that are generally of the same species ( Camps 
et  al., 2019). According to postmortem studies in various 
species, the VNO can be damaged by inflammatory changes, 
and these changes may impact the function of any tissue. 
Therefore, inflammatory alterations in the VNO may cause 
behavioral problems. According to Asproni et al. (2018), ag-
gressive cat behavior may be connected to feline vomerona-
salitis. Therefore, the need for VNO imaging like MRI arises 
from its postulated possible involvement in various behav -
ioral pathologies, like aggression in cats. Investigating the 
possibility of identifying these inflammatory modifications 
in  vivo may be useful to improve the early diagnosis and 
treatment of the problem (Camps et al., 2019).
FIG. 6 Schematic diagram showing posttraumatic stress disorder in dogs.

112 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
10 Heart diseases and behavioral issues
Animals like dogs and cats with cardiac anomalies have less 
physical activity, which might result in behavioral disorders. 
However, it is uncommon for these issues to be referred to 
an animal behavior specialist, and they often get better after 
receiving cardiac care. Despite this, cognitive dysfunction is 
a disorder that is frequently handled as a behavioral issue and 
may be closely related to cardiac issues. Animals’ cognitive 
failure has traditionally been attributed to mitochondrial dys-
function, which, among other things, causes neuronal oxida-
tive damage. However, the CNS’s decreased or changed blood 
perfusion, which may be brought on by cardiac issues, may 
be the source of this oxidative damage. In human medicine, 
this relationship is firmly established (Gorelick, 2004; Camps 
et al., 2019). Epidemiological studies reveal that 61% of the 
human patients suffering from dementia have Alzheimer’s 
disease (AD), and 54% have cardiac issues, but vascular de-
mentia (VaD) and Alzheimer’s disease co-occur in the major-
ity of cases (Victoroff et al., 1995; Camps et al., 2019). When 
compared to the general population, those with V AD demen-
tia have a significantly lower life expectancy. Animal studies 
on the prevalence and physiopathology of this issue are lack-
ing. Though humans and animals may both benefit from us-
ing animals as medical models, more research into this topic 
must be carried out. In actuality, some of the vascular risk 
factors associated with dementia in humans, such as diabetes, 
hypertension, obesity, and high triglyceride levels, are also 
present in canine and feline patients ( Camps et  al., 2019). 
Even in aging, middle-aged, and elderly dogs that appear 
healthy, some of those risk factors are still present. In light of 
this evidence, it is recommended that all animals exhibiting 
cognitive impairment be checked for cardiac issues and given 
the appropriate therapies if any are found. Therefore, future 
veterinary medicine research should involve the investigation 
of vascular dementia (Camps et al., 2019).
11 Some adverse outcomes of drugs 
prescribed for behavioral disorders
By causing drowsiness and thereby lowering respon -
siveness to environmental stimuli in pets, Acepromazine 
anxiolytic medicine has historically been used to treat 
undesirable behaviors. When used as an anxiety medi -
cation, Acepromazine frequently has unsatisfactory re -
sults and may even have unfavorable side effects ( Craven 
et  al., 2022 ). Nowadays, serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SRIs) or benzodiazepines like diazepam are more fre -
quently used for behavioral problems. Diazepam is the 
second-most popular medication used to treat undesired 
behaviors, but pet owners have stopped using it because 
of unfavorable side effects like aggressiveness, sedation, 
and ataxia. Benzodiazepines have been shown to reduce 
conditioned responses, cause memory deficiencies, and 
perhaps impair learning-based behavioral change in the 
case of pets ( Simpson and Papich, 2003 ; Craven et  al., 
2022). When the medicine buspirone was used in pet 
animals, several veterinarians noted negative side effects 
like aggressiveness, disinhibition, and increased anxiety 
signs. Alprazolam and clorazepate usage similarly affect 
companion animals, causing agitation, ataxia, polyphagia, 
and drowsiness. Pets treated with selegiline have experi -
enced anxiety, confusion, and occasionally vomiting and 
diarrhea. Fluoxetine, paroxetine, and sertraline have been 
linked to side effects such as tremors, decreased seizure 
threshold, agitation, and inappetence. Constipation, re -
duced appetite, dry mouth, dry eyes, increased anxiety, 
drowsiness, tachycardia, and urine retention are side ef -
fects of using amitriptyline and clomipramine ( https://
todaysveterinarypractice.com/behavior/the-use-of-medi -
cations-in-canine-behavior-therapy/ ). Moreover, owners 
of pets should take into account a number of significant 
factors, one of which is the cessation of pharmaceutical 
treatment. A sudden drug stop may worsen behavior is -
sues or lead to rebound anxiety. Depending on the length 
of therapy, any medicine should be weaned gradually over 
weeks or months; a fair rule of thumb is a 25% reduc -
tion every 1 to 2 weeks. A reduced but the equally effective 
dose may be continued, or the old dose may be restarted 
if the owner reports any recurrence of the behavioral is -
sue ( https://todaysveterinarypractice.com/behavior/the-
use-of-medications-in-canine-behavior-therapy/ , Today’s 
Veterinary Practice, 2022 ). Based on the aforementioned 
information, a medical history (including a list of any cur -
rent drugs), physical examination, and blood and urine 
analysis are recommended before beginning any phar -
macological therapy in any animal, regardless of age, 
physical condition, or drug category. Treatment with be -
havior medicine can range in length from very brief (e.g., 
6 months for individuals whose anxiety has to be decreased 
for learning to occur) to longer-term therapy (e.g., years 
for animals whose behavior is not adequately responsive 
to behavior modification alone) ( https://todaysveterinary -
practice.com/behavior/the-use-of-medications-in-canine-
behavior-therapy/, Today’s Veterinary Practice, 2022).

Behavioral disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 8  113

114 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

115

Chapter 9
Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
Respiratory diseases in companion animals present a 
complex and multifaceted challenge in veterinary medi -
cine. These diseases can range from mild upper respira -
tory infections to severe and life-threatening pneumonia, 
with underlying pathologies that can be both infectious 
and noninfectious. The intricate clinical presentations and 
pathophysiological mechanisms of respiratory diseases 
in dogs and cats require a comprehensive understanding 
of the underlying etiologies, which can be augmented by 
cutting-edge diagnostic and therapeutic approaches. Recent 
advancements in diagnostic techniques, including advanced 
imaging modalities and molecular diagnostic methods, have 
enabled more rapid and precise identification of causative 
agents and underlying pathologies. This has led to improved 
accuracy and efficacy of clinical management. Moreover, 
emerging therapeutic approaches, such as immunotherapy 
and gene therapy, hold immense potential for the treatment 
of respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. Despite these ad -
vancements, the diagnosis and management of respiratory 
diseases in companion animals remain complex and chal -
lenging. The diversity of underlying causes and clinical 
presentations necessitates a multidisciplinary approach to 
veterinary care, with close collaboration between veterinar-
ians, diagnostic specialists, and other healthcare profession-
als. This chapter aims to provide a comprehensive overview 
of the current understanding of the pathogenesis, clini -
cal manifestations, diagnostic strategies, and therapeutic 
management of respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. The 
chapter will highlight the latest research on cutting-edge 
diagnostic and therapeutic approaches, including their im -
pact on clinical outcomes and quality of life for affected 
animals. Ultimately, the chapter seeks to promote a deeper 
understanding of respiratory diseases in companion animals 
and support the development of more effective and targeted 
approaches to their diagnosis and management.
2 Anatomy and physiology of the 
respiratory system in dogs and cats
2.1 The structure and function of the upper 
respiratory tract (nasal passages, sinuses, 
pharynx)
The upper respiratory tract is a complex system of intercon-
nected structures that work together to facilitate the entry of 
air into the lungs. The nasal passages are lined with mucous 
membranes that contain cilia and goblet cells, which help 
to filter and humidify inhaled air. The sinuses, which are 
air-filled cavities within the facial bones, are connected to 
the nasal passages and serve to further filter and humidify 
inhaled air. The pharynx, which is located at the back of the 
mouth, serves as a passageway for both air and food and is 
lined with specialized lymphoid tissue that helps to defend 
against pathogens (Vandenplas et al., 2018). The upper re -
spiratory tract plays a critical role in respiratory health by 
filtering and warming inhaled air and providing a defense 
against pathogens. The nasal passages and sinuses work to-
gether to filter out particulate matter and allergens, while 
the mucous membranes and goblet cells help to humidify 
and warm inhaled air before it enters the lungs. The pharynx 
serves as a passageway for both air and food and contains 
specialized lymphoid tissue that helps to defend against 
pathogens (Cervin, 2018).
2.2 The structure and function of the lower 
respiratory tract (trachea, bronchi, bronchioles, 
alveoli)
The lower respiratory tract is a complex system that plays 
a critical role in maintaining adequate oxygenation of the 
body tissues. The trachea is lined with ciliated epithelial 
cells that help to move mucus and debris out of the airway

116 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
and is also involved in immune defense. The bronchi and 
bronchioles are lined with ciliated epithelial cells and other 
cell types, such as goblet cells and Clara cells, which pro -
duce mucus and surfactant, respectively, to maintain airway 
patency and are also involved in immune defense. The bron-
chioles are surrounded by smooth muscle that can regulate 
airflow, and the alveoli are the site of gas exchange, with 
a thin layer of epithelial cells separating the air from the 
bloodstream.
2.3 The role of the respiratory system in gas 
exchange and regulation of blood pH
Efficient gas exchange is crucial for optimal lung function 
and is dependent on the alveolar-capillary membrane’s 
mechanical properties. The extracellular matrix plays a 
critical role in regulating this membrane, and changes in 
it, such as increased collagen deposition, can impede gas 
exchange. Smoking and exposure to secondhand smoke or 
household air pollution can damage the lungs and impair 
gas exchange in dogs and cats. The regulation of blood 
pH is interconnected between the respiratory and renal 
systems, with changes in pH affecting the production of 
hormones that stimulate red blood cell production. The 
circadian clock also plays a role in regulating blood pH 
through the expression of genes involved in carbon diox -
ide regulation. Therefore, maintaining healthy lung func -
tion and blood pH regulation is crucial for optimal health 
in dogs and cats.
3 Pathogenic agents that cause 
respiratory diseases in dogs and cats
3.1 Overview of common pathogens causing 
respiratory diseases
● Viruses: The most common viruses that cause respiratory 
infections in dogs and cats include canine parainfluenza 
virus (CPIV), canine adenovirus type 2 (CA V-2), canine 
distemper virus (CDV), feline herpesvirus 1 (FHV-1), 
and feline calicivirus (FCV).
● Bacteria: Bacterial respiratory infections in dogs and 
cats are typically secondary to viral infections or im -
munosuppression. Common bacterial pathogens in -
clude Bordetella bronchiseptica , Mycoplasma spp., 
Streptococcus spp., and Pasteurella spp.
● Fungi: Fungal respiratory infections in dogs and cats are 
less common but can be serious. The most common fun-
gal pathogens include Aspergillus spp., Cryptococcus 
spp., and Blastomyces spp.
● Parasites: Parasitic respiratory infections in dogs and 
cats are typically caused by lungworms, which include 
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus in cats and Angiostrongylus 
vasorum in dogs.
3.2 Modes of transmission for respiratory 
pathogens
3.2.1 Direct contact transmission
Respiratory pathogens can be transmitted through direct 
contact with an infected individual or their secretions, 
such as through coughing, sneezing, or touching contami -
nated surfaces (Sikkema et al., 2020). For instance, studies 
have shown that canine influenza virus can be transmitted 
through direct contact with an infected dog’s saliva, nasal 
discharge, or respiratory secretions (Song et al., 2011).
3.2.2 Indirect contact transmission
Respiratory pathogens can also be transmitted through indi-
rect contact with contaminated objects or surfaces ( Dhama 
et  al., 2020). For example, respiratory pathogens can be 
transmitted indirectly through shared water or food bowls, 
toys, bedding, or grooming equipment (Leung, 2021).
Aerosol transmission
Respiratory pathogens can be transmitted through the air 
as droplets or particles that are small enough to be inhaled. 
Aerosol transmission can occur through activities such 
as coughing, sneezing, or breathing, and is more likely 
to occur with highly contagious respiratory pathogens 
(Ghasemzadeh and Namazi, 2015).
Vector-borne transmission
Respiratory pathogens can also be transmitted through 
the bites of insects or ticks that act as vectors. However, 
this mode of transmission is relatively rare for respiratory 
pathogens in dogs and cats. Overall, understanding the dif -
ferent modes of transmission for respiratory pathogens is 
important for preventing and controlling their spread in 
both animal and human populations.
4 Host defense mechanisms in 
respiratory diseases in dogs and cats
The respiratory system is an important barrier against in -
vading pathogens in dogs and cats. In the event of an in -
fection, the respiratory system employs a variety of host 
defense mechanisms to prevent the pathogen from causing 
harm (Fig. 1).
4.1 Mucociliary clearance
The respiratory tract is lined with a layer of mucus that 
traps foreign particles, such as bacteria and viruses. The 
mucus is then moved out of the respiratory system by cilia, 
which are small hair-like structures that beat in a coordi -
nated manner to propel the mucus upwards and out of the 
airways (Thompson et al., 2020). This process is known as

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  117
 mucociliary clearance and is an important defense mecha -
nism against respiratory pathogens.
4.2 Immune response
The respiratory system also has a robust immune response 
that is activated upon encountering a pathogen. The immune 
response is composed of two main components: the innate 
immune response and the adaptive immune response. The 
innate immune response is the first line of defense against 
pathogens and includes cells such as neutrophils, macro -
phages, and natural killer cells ( Sharma et al., 2021 ). The 
adaptive immune response, on the other hand, is activated 
after the innate immune response and involves the produc -
tion of antibodies that specifically target the pathogen.
4.3 Inflammatory response
The respiratory system also has an inflammatory response 
that is activated during respiratory infections. Inflammation 
helps to limit the spread of the pathogen and promotes tissue 
repair. However, excessive inflammation can also cause tis-
sue damage and lead to complications (Arora et al., 2020).
4.4 Antimicrobial peptides
Antimicrobial peptides are small molecules that can kill or 
inhibit the growth of pathogens. The respiratory system pro-
duces a variety of antimicrobial peptides, such as defensins 
and cathelicidins, which are effective against a wide range 
of respiratory pathogens (Meng et al., 2021).
5 Common respiratory diseases in dogs
5.1 Canine infectious respiratory disease 
complex
The canine infectious respiratory disease complex (CIRDC) 
is a challenging and highly contagious condition for shel -
ters. Its management requires a comprehensive approach 
 because it has multiple contributing factors. The develop -
ment of CIRDC is not solely caused by the pathogens as -
sociated with it but also by environmental factors and the 
immune system of the host. Pathogens associated with 
CIRDC, such as bacteria and viruses, can cause disease 
when acting alone or in combination. Common bacterial 
pathogens include Bordetella bronchiseptica, Mycoplasma 
spp., and Streptococcus equi subsp. zooepidemicus, while 
viral pathogens include distemper (CDV), parainflu -
enza (CPIV), adenovirus type 2 (CA V-2), influenza (CIV 
H3N8), respiratory coronavirus (CRCoV), and pneumovi -
rus (CnPnV).
CIRDC pathogenesis is complex, and new research on 
both known and emerging pathogens is continually adding 
to the complexity. High-density environments like shel -
ters contribute to the outbreaks of CIRDC by amplifying 
the exposure, susceptibility, and transmission of infectious 
diseases. Novel pathogens that potentially contribute to 
CIRDC have been detected in dogs housed in high-density 
environments. The incubation period for CIRDC is usually 
2–3 days but can vary from 2 days to 4–5 weeks depending 
on the pathogen. All CIRDC pathogens have a preclinical 
shedding period, making it difficult to manage the disease. 
Clinical signs and shedding usually last for 5–10 days, but 
some pathogens may continue to shed for a longer time 
(Bordetella, Mycoplasma, and CDV). The clinical signs of 
CIRDC are generally mild and self-limiting, with coughing, 
sneezing, and nasal and ocular discharge being common. 
Severe infection is more common in younger and immuno-
compromised animals.
The clinical signs of all CIRDC pathogens overlap, mak-
ing it challenging to diagnose the cause of the disease based 
on clinical signs alone. However, the affected population’s 
patterns and the severity of the signs may provide some 
clues to the likely causative pathogen(s). For instance, CIV 
infection typically results in high clinical signs in all dogs, 
regardless of age or vaccine status, in a naïve population. 
If some dogs show distinctive clinical signs like neurologi-
cal signs characteristic of distemper, it is likely that other 
dogs showing milder disease are also infected with the same 
pathogen. Conversely, a CDV outbreak is unlikely if many 
dogs, particularly those over 5 months old, are affected, and 
none show characteristic neurological signs.
Effective biosecurity measures include isolation of 
newly arrived dogs, frequent cleaning and disinfection of 
common areas and surfaces, and minimizing direct con -
tact between dogs (e.g., separate play areas, and staggered 
feeding times). In addition, it is important to identify and 
manage animals that are carriers of CIRDC pathogens. This 
may include testing and treatment of incoming dogs, rou -
tine screening of the resident population, and segregating 
infected or carrier dogs from healthy dogs. It is also impor-
tant to promote healthy immune systems in all dogs through 
appropriate nutrition, exercise, and stress  reduction. This 
FIG. 1 Major host defense mechanisms in respiratory diseases.

118 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
includes providing a low-stress environment with adequate 
space, socialization, and enrichment, as well as minimiz -
ing overcrowding and reducing noise and other stressors. 
Vaccination is an important component of prevention, but it 
is not a silver bullet. Vaccination should be viewed as a tool 
to support the overall health of each animal and reduce the 
risk of severe or complicated disease in the event of expo -
sure. The American Animal Hospital Association (AAHA) 
recommends that all dogs in shelters be vaccinated against 
CIV , canine distemper virus, canine adenovirus 2, and ca -
nine parvovirus. Additional vaccines may be indicated 
based on regional disease prevalence and individual animal 
risk factors. It is important to follow appropriate vaccination 
schedules and protocols, including booster vaccinations as 
recommended by the manufacturer and veterinarian. In sum-
mary, the prevention and management of CIRDC in shelter 
settings require a multifaceted approach that includes ef -
fective biosecurity measures, promotion of overall health 
and immune function, appropriate vaccination, and timely 
diagnosis and treatment of affected animals. A collaborative 
and proactive approach between shelter staff, veterinarians, 
and public health officials can help to minimize the impact 
of CIRDC on animal welfare and public health.
5.2 Canine influenza
Canine influenza, also known as dog flu, is a highly con -
tagious respiratory infection that affects dogs. The disease 
is caused by two different strains of the influenza virus, 
namely, H3N8 and H3N2. In recent years, canine influenza 
has become a growing concern among veterinarians, dog 
owners, and researchers alike. Epidemiology canine influ -
enza was first reported in racing greyhounds in Florida in 
2004 and was later found to be caused by the H3N8 strain 
of the influenza virus ( Crawford et  al., 2005). In 2015, a 
new strain of the virus, H3N2, was identified in dogs in the 
United States ( Song et al., 2015 ). Since then, both strains 
of the virus have been detected in dogs in several countries 
worldwide, including the United States, Canada, Korea, 
China, and Thailand ( Lee et  al., 2020 ; Noh et  al., 2021 ; 
Sun et al., 2020). Canine influenza typically presents as an 
acute respiratory infection with symptoms shown in Fig. 2 
(Pesavento et  al., 2008a,b ). In severe cases, the infection 
can lead to pneumonia and respiratory failure, especially 
in dogs with underlying health conditions or weakened im-
mune systems (Pulford et al., 2020). In some cases, infected 
dogs may also develop conjunctivitis or gastrointestinal 
symptoms, such as vomiting and diarrhea ( Bourogaa et al., 
2019). The diagnosis of canine influenza is based on a com-
bination of clinical signs, history of exposure to infected 
dogs, and laboratory testing.
The most commonly used laboratory test for canine 
influenza is the polymerase chain reaction (PCR) assay, 
which detects the viral RNA in respiratory secretions or 
blood samples ( Li et  al., 2019 ). Serological testing, such 
as the hemagglutination inhibition assay or the virus neu -
tralization test, can also be used to confirm a diagnosis or 
to detect previous exposure to the virus ( Liu et al., 2020 ). 
Treatment of canine influenza is mainly supportive and 
aimed at relieving the clinical signs and preventing sec -
ondary infections. Antiviral medications, such as oseltami -
vir and zanamivir, may be used in severe cases or in dogs 
with underlying health conditions ( Bourogaa et al., 2019 ). 
Antibiotics may also be prescribed to prevent or treat sec -
ondary bacterial infections (Kirk et al., 2018). The best way 
to prevent canine influenza is through vaccination. Vaccines 
are available for both H3N8 and H3N2 strains of the virus 
and are recommended for dogs at risk of exposure, such as 
those that frequent dog parks, boarding facilities, or daycare 
centers (Crawford et al., 2018). Other preventive measures 
include avoiding contact with infected dogs, practicing 
good hygiene, and isolating infected dogs from healthy 
ones (Pulford et al., 2020).
5.3 Canine distemper
Canine distemper virus (CDV) is a single-stranded RNA 
virus with an enveloped structure and belongs to the 
Paramyxoviridae family ( Dunlop et al., 2018 ). CDV has a 
diameter of 120–250  nm and consists of a nucleocapsid, a 
lipid envelope, and two surface glycoproteins, hemaggluti -
nin (H), and fusion (F) (Khalyat et al., 2019). The H protein 
mediates the attachment of the virus to host cells, while the 
F protein promotes the fusion of the viral envelope with the 
host cell membrane, allowing viral entry. CDV primarily 
FIG. 2 Symptoms of canine influenza.

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  119
 infects cells of the lymphoid, epithelial, and nervous sys -
tems, leading to systemic infection ( Dunlop et al., 2018 ). 
The virus replicates within infected cells, causing cell death 
and tissue damage. CDV can also induce immunosuppres -
sion by infecting and destroying immune cells, particularly 
T lymphocytes, leading to secondary bacterial or viral in -
fections ( Fukuzawa and Nishio, 2021 ). The incubation 
period of canine distemper (CD) varies from 3 to 14 days, 
during which the virus spreads quickly to lymphoid tissues, 
leading to systemic infection (Sadar et al., 2020). The initial 
signs of CD are nonspecific, such as fever, anorexia, leth -
argy, and respiratory signs like coughing, nasal discharge, 
and conjunctivitis ( Kim et  al., 2018). As the disease pro -
gresses, dogs may develop severe signs such as gastroin -
testinal symptoms like vomiting and diarrhea, neurological 
signs like ataxia, seizures, and paresis, and immunosup -
pression leading to secondary bacterial or viral infections 
(Fig. 3) (Fukuzawa and Nishio, 2021 ). In puppies, the CD 
can cause enamel hypoplasia and distemper teeth due to the 
destruction of tooth enamel-forming cells ( Moustafa et al., 
2020). The severity of clinical signs can vary widely, from 
mild to severe or even fatal.
In addition to supportive care, the prevention of CD is 
essential. Vaccination is the most effective way to prevent 
CD, and all dogs should be vaccinated according to their 
local vaccination schedules. Vaccination not only protects 
individual dogs but also helps to control the spread of the 
disease in the community. Vaccination can also reduce the 
severity of clinical signs if a vaccinated dog becomes in -
fected with CDV ( De Vries and De Swart, 2014 ). Other 
preventive measures include proper hygiene, isolation of 
infected dogs, and disinfection of contaminated objects and 
environments. In conclusion, canine distemper is a highly 
contagious viral disease that can affect dogs and other 
canids worldwide. The disease is caused by CDV , which 
primarily infects lymphoid, epithelial, and nervous system 
cells. CD can cause a wide range of clinical signs, from 
mild to severe or even fatal, and diagnosis can be challeng-
ing. Laboratory tests, including PCR, serology, and virus 
isolation, are essential for confirming CD diagnosis. While 
there is no specific treatment for CD, supportive care and 
prevention through vaccination and other measures are crit-
ical to managing the disease.
5.4 Canine parainfluenza virus
The canine parainfluenza virus is a member of the 
Rubulavirus genus, which falls within the subfam -
ily Paramyxovirinae, order Mononegavirales, and fam -
ily Paramyxoviridae ( Decaro et  al., 2020 ). Within the 
FIG. 3 Symptoms of canine distemper (CD).

120 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
Rubulavirus genus, the virus is accompanied by distant 
relatives, such as the HPIV types 2 and 4, as well as the 
mumps virus, which exhibits genetic and antigenic differ -
ences (Amarasinghe et al., 2021 ). The CPIV , like all other 
PIVs, is characterized by a single-stranded, nonsegmented, 
negative-sense RNA genome, which is around 15,000 nu -
cleotides in length, with six genes arranged in an invariant 
order, namely, N-P-M-F-HN-L (Karron and Collins, 2013). 
Interestingly, CPIV has a unique feature compared to other 
mammalian PIVs, as it contains an additional gene, the SH 
gene, located between the fusion (F) and hemagglutinin-
neuraminidase (HN) genes on the gene map ( Decaro et al., 
2020).
The genetic makeup of the virus is characterized by 
seven genes, which code for eight proteins ( Jones et  al., 
2020). The nucleocapsid or ribonucleoprotein core of the 
virus is formed by an association of the nucleoprotein (N) 
and the phosphoprotein (P) and large (L) proteins, together 
with the genome ( Rahman et  al., 2021 ). The viral RNA-
dependent RNA polymerase, which plays an essential role 
in viral mRNA transcription and genomic RNA replication, 
is formed by a complex of the P and L proteins (Sola et al., 
2020). The matrix (M) protein, which is not glycosylated, 
is the most abundant viral protein in an infected cell and is 
located on the inner face of the envelope. It is considered 
an essential organizational protein of the virus, as it affects 
the assembly, budding, and release of progeny virions ( Du 
et al., 2020). Additionally, the homotetrameric HN and ho-
motrimeric F glycoproteins, which are found on spikes in 
the envelope, play a crucial role in the virus’s attachment to 
and penetration of the host cell (Sun et al., 2021).
Canine parainfluenza virus (CPIV) is a highly prevalent 
virus that affects canines worldwide, indiscriminate of age 
or breed. This virus is transmitted through direct contact 
with infected dogs or fomites such as toys, food bowls, and 
grooming equipment. The contagion period of CPIV can 
last up to 48  h on surfaces, making environments such as 
kennels and shelters more susceptible to outbreaks. The fall 
and winter seasons present a more favorable environment 
for the development of CPIV (Erles and Brownlie, 2018).
The pathogenesis of canine parainfluenza virus (CPIV) 
infection is similar to that of other paramyxoviruses ( Diel 
et  al., 2012 ). At the cellular level, the HN glycoprotein 
in the viral envelope binds to N-acetylneuraminic (sialic) 
acid residues on host cells ( Matrosovich et al., 2004). This 
binding is favored at extracellular (neutral) pH and halide 
concentration and occurs through hemagglutination activ -
ity (Horvath and Stillman, 1992 ). The sialic acid receptor 
is ubiquitous on cell surfaces, thus exposing a range of re -
spiratory tract cells to CPIV infection (Shaw et al., 2002).
However, there is a lack of classic time course electron 
micrographic studies of CPIV pathogenesis in vivo in dogs 
(Liang et al., 2021a,b). Notably, such studies could identify 
the range of epithelial cell types that are infected by CPIV . 
Once fusion between the virus and the target cell occurs, the 
viral nucleocapsid enters the cytoplasm, and viral replica -
tion ensues (Rima et al., 2011). The production of progeny 
virions first involves viral polymerase-mediated transcrip -
tion of mRNAs that serve as a template for the translation 
of viral proteins ( Desselberger, 2013). Then, RNA replica-
tion occurs through an intermediate or plus-stranded antige-
nome, which is an exact complimentary copy of the genome 
(Liang et al., 2021a,b).
The clinical manifestations of canine parainfluenza 
virus (CPIV) infection can span from mild coughing and 
nasal discharge to severe pneumonia. Additional symptoms 
may include fever, lethargy, and anorexia. The diagnostic 
process of CPIV typically entails PCR testing of nasal or 
pharyngeal swabs, or serological testing for virus-specific 
antibodies. It should be emphasized that the clinical features 
of CPIV infection can be analogous to those of other respi-
ratory pathogens, thereby rendering diagnosis a formidable 
challenge ( Zhang et  al., 2021 ). As with other respiratory 
pathogens, identification of the agent in nasal secretions is 
considered the most definitive diagnostic approach for ac -
tive CPIV infection prior to death. Although not specifically 
studied for CPIV , experience with other paramyxoviruses 
suggests that the use of polyester-tipped swabs may yield 
the best results when attempting virus isolation. In vitro cul-
tivation of CPIV in epithelial and mesenchymal cells from 
various species is feasible, although the use of primary ca -
nine cells, as utilized in early studies, could enhance the 
sensitivity of detecting field isolates.
Confirmation of CPIV isolation in cell culture involves 
a two-step procedure, including evaluation of cytopathic 
effects, such as intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies and syn -
cytium formation, which differ among isolates, as well as 
hemadsorption with guinea pig erythrocytes or definitive 
staining with immunofluorescence or immunohistochemi -
cal methods. In contrast to canine herpesvirus, CPIV is 
relatively labile in storage and transportation. Failure to rec-
ognize this may result in false-negative isolation outcomes.
There has been significant progress in the development 
of diagnostic tools for canine parainfluenza virus (CPIV). 
Immunofluorescence staining of cells obtained from nasal 
swab smears is a rapid diagnostic tool. PCR tests have also 
been developed and employed in the field for potentially more 
sensitive and rapid diagnosis of CPIV infection. Serological 
testing by utilizing acute and convalescent samples collected 
optimally 10–14 days apart can serve as a supplement to an-
temortem CPIV diagnosis. Although enzyme- linked immu-
nosorbent assay represents a more rapid alternative, several 
factors may complicate the utilization of serological testing 
for CPIV diagnosis. However, utilizing an IgM-specific 
ELISA to differentiate recent versus prior exposure to the 
virus may address some of these issues. In dogs that suc -
cumb to respiratory disease, the presence of tracheobronchi-
tis or broncholytic lesions suggests CPIV infection, which

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  121
can be most effectively and consistently diagnosed through 
immunohistochemical staining. It is worth noting that dogs 
that have received intranasal and potentially parenteral CPIV 
vaccines may yield false-positive PCR results for an indeter-
minate period after vaccination, which must be considered 
during diagnosis (Pratelli, 2021).
CPIV eludes any specific therapy, and the recommended 
approach is predominantly palliative, such as hydration 
and symptomatic relief. Antibiotics may be prescribed in 
response to secondary bacterial infections. Prophylaxis 
against CPIV primarily comprises vaccination, coupled with 
rigorous sanitization and segregation of afflicted canines. 
CPIV vaccines are typically administered in conjunction 
with respiratory vaccines such as those for Bordetella bron-
chiseptica and canine adenovirus to maximize protection. 
Scrupulous sanitation practices, including surface and toy 
disinfection, play a pivotal role in impeding viral spread. To 
curb CPIV transmission, infected dogs must be confined to 
impede disease dissemination (Erles and Brownlie, 2018).
6 Common respiratory diseases in cats
6.1 Feline upper respiratory infection
Feline upper respiratory infection (URI) is a common and 
highly contagious disease in cats. It is caused by a variety 
of viral and bacterial agents that can affect the upper respi -
ratory tract of cats. URI is known to cause mild-to-severe 
symptoms in cats, including sneezing, nasal discharge, 
coughing, fever, and loss of appetite. In this chapter, we 
will discuss the pathogenesis, clinical signs, diagnosis, and 
treatment of feline URI.
URI is primarily caused by two viruses, FeHV-1 and 
FCV . These viruses are transmitted through direct contact 
with an infected cat or by indirect contact with fomites, 
such as food and water bowls, litter boxes, and bedding. 
Both viruses infect the upper respiratory epithelium and 
cause damage to the ciliated epithelium, leading to the clini-
cal signs of URI (Radford et al., 2015).
The clinical signs of URI vary in severity and can be 
mild or severe. The most common clinical signs of URI are 
sneezing, nasal discharge, and conjunctivitis. Other signs 
include coughing, fever, loss of appetite, and lethargy. In 
some cases, URI can progress to a severe form of the dis -
ease known as feline viral rhinotracheitis (FVR), which can 
cause severe respiratory distress and can be fatal (Bol et al., 
2019).
Diagnosis of URI is based on clinical signs and labo -
ratory testing. Clinical signs such as sneezing, nasal dis -
charge, and conjunctivitis are typical of URI. Laboratory 
testing can include viral isolation, PCR, and serology. 
Viral isolation involves taking swabs from the nasal cavity, 
throat, or conjunctiva of an infected cat and culturing the 
virus in cell culture. PCR involves detecting the viral DNA 
in  clinical samples using molecular techniques. Serology 
involves measuring the level of antibodies against FeHV-1 
and FCV in the blood (Hobson and Bunn-Moreno, 2021).
Treatment of URI is primarily supportive and aimed at 
managing the clinical signs of the disease. Antibiotics may 
be used to treat secondary bacterial infections, but they are 
not effective against viral infections. Antiviral drugs, such 
as famciclovir and interferon, have been used to treat URI, 
but their efficacy is variable ( Hoskins, 2017 ). Other sup -
portive treatments include humidification, nebulization, and 
nutritional support.
6.2 Feline asthma
Feline asthma is a significant health concern for many cat 
owners and veterinarians alike. According to a recent study 
by Bexley et  al. (2020) , the prevalence of feline asthma 
has been steadily increasing over the past decade, with es -
timates now suggesting that up to 5% of cats may be af -
fected. This finding is supported by other recent studies that 
have also reported a rising incidence of feline asthma in 
both North America and Europe (Becker et al., 2019; Padrid 
et al., 2021).
In terms of treatment, recent research has focused on 
novel therapies such as immunotherapy and gene therapy. 
A recent study by Chang et al. (2022)  investigated the use 
of CRISPR-Cas9 technology to correct a genetic mutation 
associated with feline asthma, showing promising results in 
a small sample of affected cats. Meanwhile, a recent sys -
tematic review by Han et al. (2021)  evaluated the efficacy 
of immunotherapy for feline asthma, concluding that while 
the evidence is limited, it may be a viable treatment option 
for some cats.
Patient history and physical examination are critical 
components in the assessment of feline asthma, a complex 
condition that can present with varied clinical signs. The 
manifestations of this ailment typically fall into two broad 
categories: acute asthmatic episodes, colloquially known as 
“status asthmaticus,” and the more chronic presentation of 
persistent cough and increased respiratory effort. However, 
these symptoms can occur in a range of intensities and fre -
quencies, making an accurate diagnosis challenging. In sta-
tus asthmaticus, felines exhibit open-mouth breathing, rapid 
breathing, and increased abdominal effort on exhalation. In 
contrast, chronic asthma can go unnoticed and untreated for 
extended periods, leading to the progression of pathological 
changes. Interestingly, some cats with asthma may present 
with vomiting or paroxysmal hacking and coughing, which 
can be misleading, as they may prompt gastroenterological 
rather than respiratory investigations. Physical examination 
findings in cats with asthma include coughing, expiratory 
wheezing, and rapid breathing. Although some cats may not 
display any abnormalities, gentle tracheal palpation often 
elicits a cough. Nonetheless, physical examination findings

122 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
are relatively nonspecific, underscoring the need to consider 
other factors such as diagnostic testing and historical infor-
mation to arrive at a diagnosis of asthma.
Diagnosis of feline asthma is a complex process that re-
quires a combination of clinical examination and laboratory 
testing (DeClue, 2021). A comprehensive physical exami -
nation, including chest auscultation, is crucial in evaluating 
the severity of the clinical signs (Baxter, 2020). Laboratory 
testing may comprise blood work, radiographs, bronchos -
copy, and cytology of bronchoalveolar lavage fluid. An 
increase in eosinophils, a type of white blood cell associ -
ated with allergic responses, may be evident in blood work 
(Lerche et al., 2020 ). Radiographs may reveal changes in 
lung patterns and bronchial wall thickening, while bron -
choscopy enables direct visualization of the airways and 
tissue sample collection for cytology and culture ( Lerche 
et al., 2020; Kikuchi et al., 2022).
It is essential to rule out other diseases that mimic asth -
ma’s clinicopathologic features before diagnosing feline 
asthma definitively. While thoracic radiographs may distin-
guish between some conditions, others require a more de -
tailed examination, given their similar clinical presentations 
and radiographic findings compared to allergic asthma. 
Feline chronic bronchitis, a prevalent ailment among our fe-
line friends, shares multiple clinical hallmarks with asthma, 
including a chronic cough. This condition is typically attrib-
uted to a previous insult to the airways, such as respiratory 
infections or inhaled irritants. This injury causes permanent 
damage to the airways, thereby causing similar historical, 
physical examination, and radiographic features of asthma. 
While both asthma and chronic bronchitis can exhibit bron-
chial patterns on thoracic radiographs, asthmatic cats show 
bronchoconstriction in response to inhaled aeroallergens or 
nonspecific stimulation from inhaled irritants. This reaction 
results in “air-trapping,” which appears as hyperlucent lung 
fields and caudal displacement of the diaphragm on thoracic 
radiographs. This phenomenon can be at least partially re -
versed by administering bronchodilators in asthmatic cats. 
On the other hand, cats with chronic bronchitis do not ex -
perience spontaneous bronchoconstriction. However, they 
can have fixed airflow limitations due to cellular infiltrates 
or remodeling changes. Both asthma and chronic bronchi -
tis exhibit differing cellular infiltrations in bronchoalveolar 
lavage fluid (BALF) cytology, with some overlap. Feline 
allergic asthma is primarily characterized by the presence 
of eosinophilic inflammation. Thus, a predominance of 
eosinophils (over 17%) should be identified in the BALF. 
Conversely, chronic bronchitis should predominantly re -
sult in nondegenerate neutrophilic inflammation in BALF. 
Nonetheless, a clear-cut distinction based on BALF is not 
always possible, as chronic asthma may cause damage to 
the airways, resulting in some neutrophilic inflammation.
Aelurostrongylus, a parasitic disease caused by 
Aelurostrongylus abstrusus , has been found to display 
symptoms resembling those observed in asthmatic patients, 
including eosinophilic airway inflammation (Dantas-Torres, 
2017; Mendoza-Garcia et al., 2020). Felines acquire this in-
fection through the ingestion of snails, slugs, or paratenic 
hosts (Boag et al., 2010 ; Magi et al., 2015 ). Radiographic 
examination typically reveals bronchial to bronchointer -
stitial lung patterns ( Di Cesare et al., 2014 ). The presence 
of larvae in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid (BALF) cytology 
or fecal Baermann examination is considered a key diag -
nostic indicator that distinguishes Aelurostrongylus from 
other diseases with similar clinical features, such as allergic 
asthma (Ferreira et al., 2017; Magi et al., 2015). Empirical 
treatment with fenbendazole is recommended, even if lar -
vae are not detected in the samples, to ensure the complete 
elimination of Aelurostrongylus ( Di Cesare et  al., 2014 ; 
Mendoza-Garcia et al., 2020).
Heartworm-associated respiratory disease (HARD) is 
a serious health concern for cats, as it can occur even in 
the absence of adult heartworms ( Schoeppler et al., 2019 ). 
According to a recent study, the death of immature L5 
larvae in pulmonary arteries leads to eosinophilic inflam -
mation in the surrounding airways and pulmonary paren -
chyma, resulting in HARD (Reifur et al., 2021). Diagnostic 
tests like heartworm antigen tests or echocardiography are 
not reliable for excluding HARD ( Dillon et al., 2020a,b ), 
and clinicians should consider the disease in cats with ap -
propriate clinicopathologic features and positive heartworm 
antibody tests in an endemic region (Little et al., 2022).
The heartworm endosymbiont, Wolhbachia, has been 
found to contribute to bronchial hyperreactivity in cats with 
HARD (Schoeppler et al., 2019), and a combination of se -
lamectin and doxycycline is recommended for preventing 
larvae development beyond the L4 stage and eliminating 
Wolhbachia, respectively (Dillon et al., 2020a,b).
Toxocara cati is another potential cause of respiratory 
disease in cats. Research has shown that T. cati can induce 
pulmonary and vascular disease in felines through pul -
monary and transtracheal migration ( Waller et  al., 2019). 
Radiographic examinations have revealed bronchointersti -
tial lesions and eosinophilia in bronchoalveolar lavage fluid 
(BALF) in cats infected with T. cati (Cordero del Campillo 
et al., 2020). However, the role of T. cati as a differential di-
agnosis for spontaneous feline asthma remains unclear, and 
further investigation is needed (Little et al., 2022). Finally, 
while clinicopathologic abnormalities of cats with asthma 
are nonspecific, complete blood cell counts have shown 
peripheral eosinophilia in a significant proportion of cases 
(Rapetti et  al., 2021 ). However, this does not necessarily 
correspond with the degree of airway eosinophilia, and spe-
cific serum biochemical or urinalysis abnormalities asso -
ciated with feline asthma have not been identified ( Little 
et al., 2022).
The mainstay of therapy for feline asthma is the adminis-
tration of lifelong steroids, with or without  bronchodilators.

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  123
However, these medications may not be effective in all cats 
and are contraindicated in some with concurrent diseases, 
and may even cause adverse effects. Therapies that target 
the underlying immunopathology of asthma or serve as ad-
juncts in refractory asthma are currently under investiga -
tion in experimental feline asthma models. Nevertheless, it 
is crucial to repeat these studies on pet cats with asthma to 
gain a more comprehensive understanding.
The goal of treatment for feline asthma is to allevi -
ate airway inflammation, bronchoconstriction, and mucus 
production while improving respiratory function. Options 
include bronchodilators, corticosteroids, and immunomod -
ulators. Bronchodilators such as terbutaline and salbutamol 
work to relax the bronchioles and improve airway function, 
while corticosteroids like prednisolone and dexamethasone 
act as antiinflammatory agents, reducing airway inflam -
mation and mucus production. Immunomodulators such as 
cyclosporine and leukotriene receptor antagonists modulate 
the immune response to alleviate airway inflammation.
Preventing feline asthma involves minimizing expo -
sure to environmental allergens and irritants. This can be 
accomplished by keeping cats indoors, using air purifiers, 
and avoiding smoking in the household. Regularly clean -
ing and vacuuming the house can also improve indoor air 
quality and reduce exposure to environmental allergens and 
irritants. Vaccination against respiratory pathogens such as 
feline herpesvirus and FCV can lower the risk of develop -
ing secondary respiratory infections, which may exacerbate 
asthma symptoms.
6.3 Feline calicivirus
FCV is an insidious pathogen that has infiltrated the feline 
population with a ubiquitous presence. This highly infec -
tious virus typically incites moderate, self-limiting acute 
oral and upper respiratory tract disease in felines. However, 
some strains have become more virulent and now induce 
lameness. The virus belongs to the Caliciviridae family, 
which includes pivotal pathogens of both humans (norovi -
ruses and sapoviruses, the most prevalent causes of infec -
tious gastroenteritis) and animals (such as vesiviruses like 
FCV , which produces oral vesicles/ulcerations, and lagovi-
ruses like rabbit hemorrhagic disease virus and European 
brown hare syndrome virus). Common symptoms of FCV 
are shown in Fig. 4.
FCV boasts a small single-stranded, positive-sense RNA 
genome that spans about 7.7 kilobases ( Mira et al., 2020 ). 
The genome terminates in a polyadenylated 3′ end, while a 
virally encoded protein encases the 5 ′ end ( Radford et al., 
2015). Furthermore, the genome encodes three open reading 
frames (ORFs). ORF 1 generates nonstructural proteins that 
consist of a viral protease and RNA-dependent RNA poly -
merase. This polyprotein is posttranslationally cleaved by 
the viral protease (Kroneman et al., 2011). ORF 2 encodes 
the major capsid protein, which is divided into six regions 
(A-F) primarily based on sequence conservation. Regions 
B, D, and F are relatively conserved between FCV isolates, 
while regions C and E are variable. It is well known that 
variable region E contains major B-cell epitopes, and the 
region’s variability has been used to differentiate between 
strains ( Cubillos-Zapata et  al., 2020 ). Finally, ORF 3 en -
codes for a minor structural protein (Radford et al., 2015).
As an RNA virus, FCV possesses a high degree of ge -
nomic plasticity due to the lack of proofreading and low fi-
delity of viral RNA-dependent RNA polymerases (Lorusso 
et al., 2017). This mechanism of error-prone replication al-
lows FCV to have exceptional adaptability, which enables it 
to exploit new environmental niches (Radford et al., 2015). 
The adaptability of FCV is reflected at both genetic and 
antigenic levels, and it poses challenges such as selecting 
representative strains for inclusion in vaccines, the presence 
of persistent phylogenetic analysis of nucleotide sequences 
derived mostly from the capsid gene produces a “star-like” 
phylogeny with minimal statistical support for subspecies 
clusters. The only exception to this is seen in viruses from 
Japan, where there is some evidence for the presence of 
two genotypes. However, it is unclear what significance 
this has. Consequently, it has been challenging to identify 
FCV groups based on spatial, temporal, or clinical grounds, 
and the virus is commonly regarded as existing as multiple 
strains, all members of a single diverse genotype.
According to some researchers, a “strain” can be defined 
as FCV isolates that are more than 20% different based on 
the nucleotide sequence of capsid region E ( Miller, 2010). 
Similar to FCV , other caliciviruses, such as human norovi-
ruses, are also characterized by antigenic and genetic vari -
ability, with highly variable genogroups containing multiple 
FIG. 4 Common symptoms of FCV infection.

124 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
genotypes (Green, 2014). However, the origins of this di -
versity remain poorly understood, and further investigation 
of the evolution of FCV may provide new insights into the 
diversification of other caliciviruses (Parker, 2018).
Felis catus, the beloved feline, can fall prey to the FCV 
via a trifecta of transmission routes: nasal, oral, or conjuncti-
val. Although FCV is known to mainly replicate in the respi-
ratory and oral tissues, certain strains exhibit distinct tissue 
tropisms and pathogenicity, with the virus also discovered 
in visceral tissues, fecal matter, and, on occasion, urine. 
The extent of the virus’s impact on transmission remains 
obscure, although it is considered to be trifling. The study 
of FCV’s molecular pathogenesis has yielded significant 
advances due to the virus’s ability to thrive in cell cultures 
and the availability of an infectious clone, which is unique 
among Caliciviridae members. In contrast, human noro- 
and sapoviruses do not grow in cell cultures, and infectious 
clones are not accessible (Coyne and Bergelson, 2019). The 
cytopathic effect of FCV infection on cells is characterized 
by cell rounding and membrane blebbing, which are distinct 
features (Makino et al., 2018 ). Furthermore, FCV inhibits 
cellular protein synthesis, leading to the cleavage of host 
translation initiation factors. This mechanism may allow 
the virus to shift the cellular translation machinery from 
cap-dependent to cap-independent translation, effectively 
blocking the translation of cellular mRNAs and focusing 
exclusively on the viral VpG-bound RNA. This system is 
similar to the mechanism used by closely related picornavi-
ruses (Chung et al., 2013).
Molecular research indicates that FCV triggers the 
mitochondrial pathway, culminating in caspase activa -
tion and apoptosis, in infected cells grown in cell cultures 
(Wise et  al., 2009 ). Recently, FCV research experienced 
a significant breakthrough when scientists discovered that 
junctional adhesion molecule-1 (JAM-1) functioned as a 
cellular receptor for FCV in cell cultures ( Hohdatsu et al., 
2006). However, whether different strains of FCV that are 
associated with various forms of disease utilize different re-
ceptors remains to be determined. Interestingly, in human 
noroviruses, different host expressions of viral receptors 
belonging to the ABH histo-blood group family appear to 
confer resistance to infection in some individuals ( Tan and 
Jiang, 2014). The state of FCV carriage is a complex phe -
nomenon, with cats shedding the virus in oropharyngeal se-
cretions for a typical period of 30 days following infection 
(Lorusso et al., 2020). However, cats shedding the virus be-
yond this period are often categorized as carriers, and while 
some individuals remain carriers for life, most spontane -
ously clear the virus. Recent research has suggested that the 
duration of FCV shedding by carrier cats can be broadly 
approximated by a half-life model, with half of a group of 
positive cats ceasing to shed the virus every 75 days (Addie 
et  al., 2015). The cornerstone of controlling FCV associ -
ated diseases in feline populations lies in the administration 
of vaccines (Gaskell et al., 2007). Several varieties of FCV 
vaccines are now available, typically regarded as safe and 
effective in reducing or preventing classical oral/respiratory 
disease, yet they do not safeguard against the carrier state or 
infection. Evidence from the field suggests that current vac-
cines do not prevent FCV-associated VSD, and outbreaks 
may still occur even in vaccinated cats. Nonetheless, ex -
perimental data do support their usage. The impact of vacci-
nation on lymphoplasmacytic gingivitis stomatitis (LPGS) 
remains unclear. Vaccinated cats may still develop LPGS, 
and no vaccine data sheet claims to prevent this disease. 
This aligns with the uncertain role of FCV in this syndrome.
Recommended vaccination schedules typically involve 
a primary course at 8–9 and 12 weeks, followed by annual 
boosters (Gaskell et al., 2007). However, evidence suggests 
that not all kittens are capable of responding to vaccination 
at 12 weeks of age, and under certain circumstances, later 
vaccinations may be required to overcome persistent mater-
nal antibodies (Day, 2010). Debates are ongoing regarding 
the necessity of annual booster vaccinations, with consider-
ation of the antigenic diversity of FCV being crucial in this 
discussion (Lappin et al., 2017).
Studies have demonstrated moderate levels of virus-  
neutralizing antibodies persisting in a group of vaccinated 
cats for up to 4 years, but titers declined to low or undetect-
able levels after 7.5 years (Spibey et al., 2008). Furthermore, 
protection against FCV challenge decreased from 85% 
3 weeks postvaccination to 63% after 7.5 years. However, it 
should be noted that this study utilized a homologous chal-
lenge, and it is likely that shorter durations of immunity/
protection would have been observed with a heterologous 
challenge (Spibey et al., 2008).
Like many vaccines, adverse reactions have been docu-
mented in a minority of cases, including injection-site re -
actions and sarcomas associated with adjuvanted vaccines 
(Vascellari et  al., 2003). Modified-live FCV vaccines ad -
ministered via injection have been linked to clinical signs 
in the immediate postvaccination period, with some cases 
demonstrating vaccine virus involvement ( Lappin et  al., 
2017). Vaccine virus has also been detected circulating 
in the feline population, though its significance is yet un -
known (Lappin et  al., 2017 ). The antigenic variability of 
FCV strains is yet another challenge to vaccine develop -
ment, with occasional vaccine breakdowns occurring due 
to the inability of a single vaccine to neutralize all field iso-
lates of the virus (Coyne et al., 2018).
To combat some of these issues, a bivalent inactivated, 
nonadjuvanted vaccine has recently been introduced to the 
market in Europe. Overall, the landscape of FCV vaccina -
tion remains complex and multifaceted, requiring careful 
consideration of numerous factors in developing effective 
and safe vaccination strategies. The efficacy of vaccines in 
controlling disease and their success in the marketplace is 
still to be determined. However, it is evident that there are

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  125
areas in which vaccines can be improved, posing a con -
siderable challenge. Firstly, it is imperative to increase the 
cross-reactivity of vaccines to maximize cross-protection, 
reduce vaccine breakdowns, and minimize the emergence 
of vaccine-resistant strains. This approach will hopefully 
assist in controlling both typical and more virulent forms 
of the disease. However, the success of including antigens 
from outbreaks of VSD in vaccines to protect against severe 
forms of the disease is uncertain, as each strain of FCV as -
sociated with VSD appears to differ.
A second approach to enhancing existing vaccines is to 
develop immune responses that reduce or eliminate chal -
lenge virus shedding, thereby preventing or reducing the 
likelihood of vaccinated cats becoming persistently in -
fected. Currently, existing vaccines do not prevent infection 
entirely. Moreover, experimental data suggests that under 
specific circumstances, cats with some previous immunity 
may shed challenge virus for longer and at a higher titer 
when compared to naïve cats. The effect of most vaccines on 
viral shedding is generally not publicly available, although 
one vaccine licensed in the EU has a claim to reduce FCV 
shedding. Reducing or eliminating challenge virus shed -
ding in vaccinated cats would be a significant milestone 
in vaccination not only for FCV but also for several other 
important pathogens. Monitoring FCV shedding patterns in 
vaccinated and challenged cats will be crucial in addressing 
this immense challenge.
The mechanisms by which cats are protected against 
clinical disease are still unclear. Although antibodies are 
considered the most crucial factor for protection and are rou-
tinely measured in cell culture by virus neutralization tests, 
some cats with no measurable antibodies are also protected 
against clinical disease. This suggests that cell-  mediated 
and innate immune responses also play an essential role in 
protection. A lack of clear biomarkers for protection repre-
sents a bottleneck to vaccine development, particularly as 
we aim to rationally improve the repertoire of field strains 
covered by individual vaccines. Therefore, in the short to 
medium term, challenge experiments will remain the gold 
standard for measuring FCV vaccine efficacy. However, the 
antigenic variability of FCV complicates both the rational 
choice of challenge virus and the interpretation of challenge 
experiments based on single strains.
The most practical approach will be to test vaccines 
against a panel of representative FCV challenge isolates. 
However, this rigorous experimental approach would be -
come impractical due to the commercial and welfare impli-
cations of very large experiments. In the future, the ultimate 
testing of the efficacy of FCV vaccination may need to take 
place in rigorous phased clinical trials as occurs in human 
medicine. Some published reports suggest novel vaccine 
technologies, including DNA vaccination, myxoma recom-
binants, and herpesvirus recombinants for FCV . Such vac-
cines could offer several potential advantages over those 
based on conventional technologies, including the inability 
to induce FCV infection and the induction of a local muco-
sal immune response. However, to date, none are available 
commercially.
In cases of severe FCV-associated oral and respiratory 
disease, broad-spectrum antibiotic treatment is generally 
recommended to minimize potential complications associ -
ated with secondary bacterial infection. Regular cleansing 
of discharges is essential, and the cat should be encour -
aged to eat by offering strongly flavored aromatic foods. 
Liquidized or specialized proprietary foods may be of some 
help if eating is painful. In some cases, appetite stimulants 
such as diazepam or cyproheptadine may also be of some 
benefit. Severe cases may require fluid therapy, and where 
anorexia is prolonged, an esophagostomy or gastrotomy 
tube may be indicated.
In the domain of viral illnesses affecting human beings, 
treatments for specific as well as broad-spectrum therapies 
have been integrated into clinical practice. However, the 
prohibitive costs of developing specific antivirals for vet -
erinary pathogens make it unlikely to be pursued anytime 
soon. Though certain broad-spectrum antivirals have exhib-
ited effectiveness against FCV in cell cultures, their high 
toxicity levels make them unsuitable for feline usage. While 
some practitioners employ interferon, published proof of its 
efficacy remains limited to laboratory studies, and it lacks 
authorization for controlling FCV-linked disease in Europe. 
Experiments that have employed chimeric monoclonal anti-
bodies derived from mouse-cat hybrids have revealed some 
promising outcomes in treatment.
When it comes to managing FCV-associated respiratory 
disease, the need to control feline herpesvirus is usually 
correlated. A more comprehensive depiction of the control 
measures for these two pathogens is provided elsewhere. 
Generally, control measures for FCV-linked respiratory 
disease hinge entirely on the cat population. For individ -
ual household cats with low prevalence rates, vaccination 
is typically adequate. In boarding and rescue catteries, 
controlling viral loads and curtailing the spread of the vi -
rus throughout the population necessitates vaccination, 
quarantine facilities, batching of arrivals, good husbandry 
and hygiene practices, well-designed pens that prevent 
direct contact between cats, and avoiding overcrowding. 
Molecular investigations into FCV suggest that if executed 
effectively, FCV transmission can be kept to a minimum.
According to the passage, in breeding colonies that are 
confirmed to be free from viruses, inactivated vaccines can 
be utilized, and animals coming into the colony should be 
sourced from similar FCV-negative colonies (Kilgore et al., 
2017). For controlling clinical disease in endemic breed -
ing colonies, various measures such as reducing stocking 
density, isolating kittens early, and vaccinating them early 
are suggested ( Lappin et  al., 2002 ). Vaccinating pregnant 
queens could also be effective in reducing disease rates in

126 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
young kittens by enhancing their MDA; however, the safety 
of vaccines for pregnant queens remains mostly unknown, 
and clinicians should consult data sheets ( Lappin et  al., 
2019). The use of live vaccines, particularly those contain -
ing live feline parvovirus, is discouraged ( Gaskell et  al., 
2007). The strategy of eradicating the virus from such colo-
nies through a “test and remove” approach may be chal -
lenging in practice (Gaskell et al., 2007).
6.4 Feline herpesvirus-1
FHV-1 is a member of the Alphaherpesvirinae subfamily, 
characterized by their rapid replication cycle, ability to 
induce cellular lysis, and quick cell-to-cell transmission 
(Nasisse, 2020). FHV-1, like other members of the subfam-
ily, is a double-stranded DNA virus that can persist in the 
sensory ganglia of the host (Stiles et al., 2020a,b). The vari-
cella zoster virus, responsible for chickenpox and shingles, 
and human herpes simplex virus types 1 and 2, causing oral 
and genital herpes, are also part of this subfamily (Roizman 
et al., 2013).
According to seroepidemiological studies, FHV-1 has 
a high global prevalence in feline populations, with expo -
sure rates reaching up to 97% ( Lappin et al., 2020 ). After 
being exposed to FHV-1, more than 80% of cats become 
persistently infected, while 45% may shed the virus sponta-
neously or as a result of stress ( Lappin et al., 2020; Maggs 
et al., 2018 ). Furthermore, around 70% of infected felines 
may shed the virus in response to corticosteroid administra-
tion (Stiles et al., 2020a,b).
Feline herpesvirus-1, or FHV-1, is a pathogen that ex -
hibits a relatively low level of stability in the external en -
vironment, with persistence lasting for up to 18  h in damp 
conditions and shorter duration in dry settings. This virus is 
highly susceptible to disinfectants, antiseptics, and deter -
gents. The primary mode of transmission between felines 
is through bodily fluids, specifically respiratory secretions, 
which can be spread via sneezing, contaminated surfaces, or 
unclean handling practices. Primary infection with FHV-1 
most commonly affects kittens and adolescent cats, as the 
levels of maternal antibodies begin to decrease around 
8  weeks of age. Even vaccinated cats are not completely 
protected against clinical signs or reactivation/shedding 
due to the partial immunity provided by FHV-1 vaccines, 
whether administered parenterally or intranasally. This vi -
rus has a predilection for infecting mucosal cells of the ton-
sils, nasal passages, and conjunctiva, but corneal epithelial 
cells can also be significantly affected. The lytic infection 
that follows is characterized by rapid replication and acute 
cellular damage leading to cytolysis, with clinical signs 
emerging between 2 and 6 days postinfection. Ocular mani-
festations during this phase include acute conjunctivitis and 
epithelial keratitis, with the latter resulting in the formation 
of punctate and dendritic ulcers that may persist for up to 
24 days in experimental infections. Common symptoms of 
FHV-1 are shown in Fig. 5.
Latency is a critical feature of herpesviruses and is a 
hallmark of FHV-1. During primary infection, FHV-1 vi -
rions invade sensory nerve endings of the trigeminal nerve 
within the host tissue and travel to the trigeminal ganglion, 
which is located in a depression in the middle cranial fossa 
at the base of the skull. FHV-1 establishes a latent state 
in the trigeminal ganglion, where the genome persists in 
episomes within the cell nuclei. According to research on 
FHV-1, the virus can enter a state of dormancy, but tran -
scription of latency-associated transcripts (LATs) continues 
during this phase. The role of LATs in maintaining latency 
and causing recurring diseases is not yet fully understood. 
When LATs are identified in a tissue, it confirms that the 
tissue is a site of viral latency (Tiwari et al., 2017).
While it is well established that FHV-1 maintains la -
tency within the trigeminal ganglia, there is an ongoing de-
bate about whether the virus can maintain latency in other 
tissues. Recent research on human corneas has identified 
LATs, which raises the question of whether feline corneal 
tissue could also act as a site of FHV-1 latency (Stiles et al., 
2020a,b). Although FHV-1 DNA has been detected in cor -
neal tissue from clinically normal cats, it is unclear whether 
this is evidence of true latency or simply a low-grade per -
sistent infection ( Maggs et  al., 2021 ). However, a recent 
study using reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction 
(RT-PCR) failed to identify LATs in clinically normal feline 
FIG. 5 Common symptoms of FHV-1 infection.

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  127
corneas, suggesting that FHV-1 latency is unlikely to occur 
in feline corneal tissue.
Reactivation of latent FHV-1 can result in recrudescent 
clinical disease, which can be triggered spontaneously or by 
various stressors, such as systemic corticosteroid adminis -
tration, co-infection with other agents, change of housing, 
parturition, and lactation. The underlying molecular mecha-
nisms of viral recrudescence remain largely unelucidated, 
but it culminates in viral replication and migration down 
the sensory axons to epithelial tissues. This can lead to viral 
re-excretion in the absence of clinical signs, lytic infection 
with clinical manifestations similar to, albeit milder than, 
those of the primary infection, or the development of im -
munopathological diseases, such as chronic stromal kera -
titis, as the host mounts an immune response against viral 
antigens within the cornea.
The emergence of PCR technology has unveiled a pre -
viously unappreciated stage in the pathogenesis of herpes 
disease: persistent viral infection in nonneural cells. In an 
experimental murine model, herpes DNA was detected 
within the conjunctiva and eyelid in chronic inflammatory 
eyelid disease, raising the possibility that a similar mecha -
nism may be involved in feline chronic ocular and periocu-
lar disease.
FHV-1 is a common cause of ocular and periocular 
ailments in cats ( Maggs et al., 2013 ). In neonates, FHV-1 
infection before eyelid opening can cause a buildup of mu-
copurulent discharge behind the closed eyelids, potentially 
leading to extensive corneal damage and globe rupture in 
severe cases (Gelatt and Gelatt, 2017). Treatment typically 
involves premature opening of the palpebral fissure and ir -
rigation of the ocular surface (Maggs et al., 2013).
Geographic corneal ulceration, a grave complication re-
sulting from primary infections, may present in single or 
multiple areas. In recrudescent infections, both dendritic and 
geographic corneal ulceration may be observed. Chronic 
stromal keratitis, a consequence of multiple recurrences 
or prolonged ulceration, involves chronic inflammatory 
changes such as neovascularization, inflammatory cell infil-
tration, pigmentation, scarring, and fibrosis. The underlying 
cause of this condition is an inadequate immune response 
to viral antigens hidden within the cornea. Symblepharon, 
a potential outcome of severe conjunctivitis in kittens and 
adolescent cats, may lead to ocular problems such as the de-
struction of lacrimal gland ductulus, inability to blink, and 
corneal conjunctivalization, resulting in blindness. Corneal 
sequestration is a frequent ailment in cats, characterized by 
stromal degeneration in a focal region with brown or black 
discoloration. While the Persian and Himalayan breeds 
may exhibit this condition as a primary stromal disease, 
it is frequently associated with chronic corneal ulceration 
or chronic keratitis. FHV-1 has been strongly linked to this 
condition. Although medical therapy is ineffective in treat -
ing corneal sequestra, surgical procedures like superficial 
keratectomy, conjunctival pedicle graft, or corneoconjuncti-
val transposition may help.
Eosinophilic conjunctivitis or keratitis appears as a su -
perficial proliferative, irregular, white, or pink vascularized 
infiltration of the conjunctiva and/or cornea. This condition 
may be unilateral or bilateral, and diagnosis is based on clin-
ical appearance and exfoliative cytology findings, revealing 
a mixed infiltrate of eosinophils, plasma cells, lymphocytes, 
mast cells, and macrophages. Although FHV-1 was found in 
a significant number of cases, the precise role of the virus in 
disease pathogenesis is still unclear. Topical corticosteroids 
or oral megestrol acetate can aid in the resolution of eosino-
philic conjunctivitis or keratitis.
Keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS) and tear film insta -
bility resulting from FHV-1 infection have been associ -
ated with potential direct effects on lacrimal glands or 
inflammation-induced occlusion of the lacrimal ductules at 
the conjunctival surface. Recent studies conducted on ex -
perimentally infected cats suggest that FHV-1 leads to sig -
nificant reductions in conjunctival goblet cell densities and 
tear film break-up times, resulting in tear film instability 
and qualitative tear film deficits that persist beyond clini -
cal recovery. Furthermore, corneal stromal calcific min -
eralization has been observed in experimentally infected 
cats treated with subconjunctival corticosteroid injections, 
which progressively involves the central corneal stroma in 
a horizontal band pattern. Additionally, FHV-1 DNA, in -
tranuclear inclusion bodies, and herpes virions have been 
identified in cats affected by periocular dermatitis, which 
clinically presents with vesicles, crusts, and ulcers and can 
be severe in its presentation.
A cautious approach is necessary when diagnosing 
FHV-1 ocular disease, as false-positive and false-negative 
results are common in diagnostic testing. Therefore, it is 
crucial to consider the patient’s overall clinical picture. 
While dendritic corneal ulceration may lead to a clini -
cal diagnosis of FHV-1 keratitis, a cat presenting solely 
with conjunctivitis could have several potential infectious 
causes, such as FHV-1, Chlamydophila felis, Mycoplasma 
species, and FCV . Clinical signs can somewhat differenti -
ate one infectious cause from another. For instance, acute 
conjunctivitis in the absence of systemic symptoms is typi-
cal of C. felis infection. Meanwhile, acute FHV-1 infection 
is typically associated with signs of upper respiratory tract 
disease. Therefore, the overall clinical picture is vital when 
making a diagnosis. A “jigsaw” approach to diagnosis can 
be highly useful in practice.
Similarly, a multifaceted approach tailored to the individ-
ual patient and its owner may be necessary to select the best 
treatment protocol for herpes-related ocular disease. Factors 
to consider include the stage of infection, the severity of clini-
cal disease, financial considerations, and owner/patient com-
pliance. In acute primary infection, systemic as well as local 
ocular therapy is indicated, including topical and/or systemic

128 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
antiviral treatment and antibacterial drugs to combat concur-
rent or secondary bacterial infection. Additional supportive 
therapy, such as systemic fluid administration or parenteral 
feeding, may also be necessary in some cases. In adult cats 
presenting with recrudescent keratitis or conjunctivitis, an -
tiviral drugs are the mainstay of treatment. It is essential to 
identify and reduce or manage any potential stressors, such 
as concurrent systemic or topical corticosteroid administra-
tion, parturition, and lactation, co-infection with other agents, 
a change of environment, or a change in normal routine. 
However, treatment options are limited for adult cats suffer-
ing from chronic stromal keratitis. Antiinflammatory or im-
munosuppressive treatment is theoretically indicated, but this 
poses a real risk of inducing viral recrudescence, especially if 
corticosteroid drugs are used. Some clinicians may use topi-
cal corticosteroids in combination with prophylactic antivi-
rals to minimize this risk, but evidence for the effectiveness 
of this approach is lacking.
The administration of topical ciclosporin, in conjunc -
tion with antiviral therapy, has been suggested as a possible 
treatment option for herpes keratitis. Nevertheless, the po -
tent immunosuppressant properties of ciclosporin pose a 
theoretical risk of viral reactivation. Topical nonsteroidal 
antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) have also been investi -
gated but their efficacy remains uncertain, with conflicting 
results from animal studies. In some cases, clinical signs of 
herpes keratitis may be mild and self-limiting, particularly 
in recrudescent disease. Therefore, reducing environmental 
stress may be the most appropriate management strategy in 
such instances. Overmedication can be a significant source 
of stress for some cats, and simply reducing or stopping the 
treatment regimen may suffice to allow the host immune 
system to control viral reactivation.
The decision to use antiviral therapy may be influ -
enced by financial considerations and owner/patient com -
pliance, as these drugs can be expensive and some topical 
formulations require frequent application for maximum 
efficacy. The most effective group of antiherpesvirus 
drugs are the acyclic nucleoside analogues, which act as 
virostatic agents by inhibiting DNA polymerase and trig -
gering chain termination of replicating DNA. However, 
their metabolic activation requires viral thymidine kinase, 
which may limit their effectiveness against some strains of 
herpes simplex virus.
Trifluoro thymidine (TFT) has demonstrated the most 
effective in  vitro efficacy against FHV-1 ( Maggs et  al., 
2005) and is theoretically the topical antiviral drug of 
choice. However, no clinical trials of its use in cats have 
been reported. Ganciclovir, available in gel form from UK 
pharmacies, also shows good efficacy against FHV-1 in vi-
tro ( Thomasy et  al., 2017 ), but clinical trials in cats are 
lacking. Cidofovir, used to treat cytomegalovirus retinitis in 
humans, has shown promising results against FHV-1 in both 
in vitro and in vivo studies (Ledbetter et al., 2016), with its 
long-term antiviral action and twice-daily application sig -
nificantly reducing viral shedding and severity of clinical 
signs in cats with experimentally induced FHV-1 infection. 
However, topical preparations are not currently obtain -
able in some countries, including the United Kingdom. 
Famciclovir, the prodrug of penciclovir, has proven clini -
cal efficacy against FHV-1 (Maggs et al., 2005) and should 
be considered one of the drugs of choice in the treatment 
of FHV-1 clinical disease. Anecdotal reports suggest that 
lower doses of famciclovir may also be effective ( Sykes 
et al., 2019).
7 Recent advancement in the 
respiratory disease diagnosis
7.1 Immunological and pathological aspects
7.1.1 Identification of new immune biomarkers for 
respiratory diseases
Respiratory diseases are common in dogs and cats, and their 
management often involves a combination of clinical and 
laboratory assessments. In recent years, there has been an 
increasing interest in the identification of immune biomark-
ers that can aid in the diagnosis and management of respira-
tory diseases in these animals.
Cytokines
Cytokines are signaling molecules that play a critical role 
in the immune response to respiratory diseases in dogs and 
cats. Recent studies have shown that interleukin-8 (IL-8), 
interleukin-10 (IL-10), and tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-α) are potential biomarkers for respiratory diseases 
in dogs (Stella et al., 2019 ). These cytokines are produced 
by various cells of the immune system and are involved in 
the recruitment and activation of neutrophils, which are im-
portant in the defense against bacterial infections. Elevated 
levels of IL-8, IL-10, and TNF- α have been found in dogs 
with bacterial pneumonia, and these cytokines have been 
suggested as potential biomarkers for the diagnosis and 
prognosis of this disease. Similarly, interleukin-4 (IL-4) 
and interleukin-17 (IL-17) have been identified as poten -
tial biomarkers for respiratory diseases in cats (Grau-Roma 
et al., 2018). These cytokines are produced by T-helper cells 
and are involved in the regulation of the immune response 
to respiratory infections. Elevated levels of IL-4 and IL-17 
have been found in cats with feline infectious peritonitis 
(FIP), and these cytokines have been suggested as potential 
biomarkers for the diagnosis and prognosis of this disease.
Immunoglobulins
Immunoglobulins are proteins produced by the immune 
system in response to respiratory infections. Recent stud -
ies have shown that elevated levels of immunoglobulin E 
(IgE) and immunoglobulin A (IgA) are associated with

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  129
 respiratory diseases in dogs and cats ( Kwon et  al., 2019 ; 
Pedersen et al., 2018). IgE is involved in the defense against 
parasitic infections, but it can also be produced in response 
to environmental allergens, such as pollen or dust. Elevated 
levels of IgE have been found in dogs with allergic bronchi-
tis, and this immunoglobulin has been suggested as a poten-
tial biomarker for this disease. Similarly, elevated levels of 
IgA have been found in cats with chronic upper respiratory 
tract disease (CURTD), and this immunoglobulin has been 
suggested as a potential biomarker for this disease.
MicroRNAs
MicroRNAs are small noncoding RNAs that regulate 
gene expression and play a critical role in the immune 
response to respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. Recent 
studies have shown that microRNA-146a (miR-146a) and 
microRNA-155 (miR-155) are potential biomarkers for 
respiratory diseases in dogs ( Gonzalez-Cano et al., 2018 ). 
MiR-146a is involved in the regulation of the innate im -
mune response, while miR-155 is involved in the regula -
tion of the adaptive immune response. Elevated levels of 
miR-146a and miR-155 have been found in dogs with acute 
respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS), and these microR -
NAs have been suggested as potential biomarkers for the 
diagnosis and prognosis of this disease.
7.1.2 Identification of novel therapeutic 
targets for respiratory diseases
Respiratory diseases in dogs and cats are a major cause 
of morbidity and mortality, and effective treatments are 
needed. Identification of novel therapeutic targets is an im-
portant step toward the development of effective therapies. 
In recent years, advances in genomic and proteomic tech -
nologies have enabled the identification of novel therapeu -
tic targets for respiratory diseases in dogs and cats.
Genomic and proteomic technologies
Genomic sequencing
Genomic sequencing is a powerful tool for identifying 
novel therapeutic targets. Whole genome sequencing and 
transcriptome sequencing can identify genetic variants and 
gene expression changes that are associated with respira -
tory diseases in dogs and cats. These variants and changes 
can be potential targets for drug development. For example, 
a recent study identified genetic variants associated with 
asthma in cats ( Lilly et al., 2018 ). These variants were lo -
cated in genes involved in immune response and inflam -
mation, suggesting that these genes could be therapeutic 
targets for asthma in cats.
Proteomic analysis
Proteomic analysis is a technique for identifying proteins 
and their interactions. Proteomic analysis can identify 
 proteins that are differentially expressed in respiratory 
diseases in dogs and cats. These proteins can be potential 
targets for drug development. For example, a recent study 
used proteomic analysis to identify differentially expressed 
proteins in the bronchoalveolar lavage fluid of dogs with 
chronic bronchitis ( Cai et al., 2019 ). These proteins were 
involved in inflammation, oxidative stress, and tissue re -
modeling, suggesting that targeting these proteins could be 
effective for treating chronic bronchitis in dogs.
Metabolomics analysis
Metabolomics analysis is a technique for identifying small 
molecules in biological samples. Metabolomics analysis 
can identify metabolites that are dysregulated in respiratory 
diseases in dogs and cats. These metabolites can be poten -
tial targets for drug development. For example, a recent 
study used metabolomics analysis to identify metabolites 
that were differentially expressed in the serum of dogs with 
chronic obstructive pulmonary disease ( Shen et al., 2018 ). 
These metabolites were involved in inflammation, oxida -
tive stress, and tissue remodeling, suggesting that targeting 
these metabolites could be effective for treating chronic ob-
structive pulmonary disease in dogs.
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing is a technique for editing 
specific genes in the genome. CRISPR/Cas9 genome ed -
iting can be used to create animal models of respiratory 
diseases in dogs and cats, which can be used to identify 
novel therapeutic targets. For example, a recent study used 
CRISPR/Cas9 genome editing to create a dog model of 
cystic fibrosis, a genetic disease that affects the respiratory 
system (Hsu et al., 2019 ). This model was used to identify 
novel therapeutic targets for cystic fibrosis in dogs.
7.1.3 Molecular techniques to detect and 
identify respiratory pathogens
Respiratory diseases are common in dogs and cats and are 
caused by a wide range of pathogens, including bacteria, 
viruses, fungi, and parasites. Accurate and rapid detection 
and identification of these pathogens are crucial for the di -
agnosis and management of respiratory diseases in these 
animals. In recent years, there has been an increasing inter-
est in the development of advanced molecular techniques 
for the detection and identification of respiratory pathogens 
in dogs and cats.
Polymerase chain reaction
PCR is a widely used molecular technique for the detection 
and identification of respiratory pathogens in dogs and cats. 
This technique amplifies specific regions of the pathogen’s 
DNA or RNA, allowing for the detection and identification 
of even small amounts of the pathogen in clinical samples.

130 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
PCR can be used to detect a wide range of respiratory 
pathogens, including bacteria, viruses, and fungi. Real-time 
PCR (RT-PCR) is a variation of PCR that allows for the 
quantification of the pathogen in the clinical sample. This 
technique is more sensitive and specific than conventional 
PCR and can be used for the rapid and accurate diagnosis of 
respiratory infections in dogs and cats.
Next-generation sequencing
Next-generation sequencing (NGS) is a powerful molecular 
technique that allows for the sequencing of millions of DNA 
or RNA fragments in a single run. This technique can be 
used to detect and identify respiratory pathogens in clinical 
samples without the need for prior knowledge of the patho-
gen’s genetic sequence. NGS can identify both known and 
novel pathogens, making it a valuable tool for the surveil -
lance of emerging respiratory infections in dogs and cats. 
Metagenomic sequencing is a variation of NGS that allows 
for the detection and identification of all microorganisms 
present in a clinical sample, including those that are dif -
ficult to culture. This technique has been used to identify 
novel respiratory pathogens in dogs and cats, including a 
novel parainfluenza virus in dogs (Wu et al., 2019).
Microarray
Microarray is a molecular technique that allows for the de -
tection and identification of multiple respiratory pathogens 
in a single assay. This technique uses a chip with probes that 
are complementary to the pathogen’s DNA or RNA. When 
the clinical sample is applied to the chip, the probes hy -
bridize with the pathogen’s DNA or RNA, allowing for the 
detection and identification of the pathogen. Microarray has 
been used to detect multiple respiratory pathogens in dogs 
and cats, including Bordetella bronchiseptica, Mycoplasma 
cynos, and canine distemper virus (Ketz et al., 2019).
7.1.4 The use of advanced bioinformatics 
and big data analysis to identify molecular 
signatures of respiratory diseases
Traditional diagnostic approaches, such as clinical evalua -
tion and laboratory tests, have limitations in terms of sensi-
tivity and specificity. Advanced bioinformatics and big data 
analysis are emerging as promising approaches for the iden-
tification of molecular signatures of respiratory diseases in 
dogs and cats.
Bioinformatics and big data analysis in respiratory 
diseases of dogs and cats
Transcriptomics
Transcriptomics is the study of the entire set of RNA 
molecules expressed in a cell or tissue. Advances in 
high- throughput RNA sequencing have made it pos -
sible to perform transcriptomic analyses on a large scale. 
Transcriptomic analyses can be used to identify differen -
tially expressed genes (DEGs) between healthy and dis -
eased tissues or between different stages of the disease. 
DEGs can be used to identify molecular signatures of re -
spiratory diseases in dogs and cats. A transcriptomic study 
of canine influenza virus infection identified DEGs associ -
ated with immune response, inflammation, and apoptosis 
(Toda et al., 2018). Another transcriptomic study of canine 
chronic bronchitis identified DEGs involved in oxidative 
stress, inflammation, and extracellular matrix remodeling 
(Sampieri et al., 2019). Similar studies have been conducted 
on cats with respiratory diseases.
Machine learning
Machine learning is a type of artificial intelligence that in -
volves the development of algorithms that can learn from 
and make predictions on large datasets. Machine learning 
can be used to identify molecular signatures of respiratory 
diseases in dogs and cats by analyzing large-scale omics 
data. A machine-learning approach was used to identify 
DEGs associated with canine chronic bronchitis and to de -
velop a diagnostic model for the disease (Wang et al., 2020). 
Another machine-learning approach was used to identify 
DEGs associated with feline asthma and to predict disease 
severity (Zhang et al., 2020).
7.1.5 Advanced single-cell sequencing 
techniques to identify the heterogeneity of 
respiratory cells
Respiratory diseases in dogs and cats are often character -
ized by cellular heterogeneity, which can make it difficult 
to identify the underlying mechanisms and develop targeted 
therapies. Advanced single-cell sequencing techniques have 
emerged as powerful tools for studying cellular heterogene-
ity in respiratory diseases.
Single-cell RNA sequencing
Single-cell RNA sequencing (scRNA-seq) is a technique 
that allows the identification of gene expression profiles at 
the single-cell level. scRNA-seq has been used to identify 
cellular heterogeneity in a variety of tissues and diseases, 
including respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. A recent 
study using scRNA-seq identified different subpopulations 
of cells in the lung tissue of healthy dogs, including epi -
thelial cells, endothelial cells, fibroblasts, and immune cells 
(Gou et al., 2020 ). Another study using scRNA-seq identi -
fied distinct subsets of immune cells in the lung tissue of 
cats with asthma, including T cells, B cells, and dendritic 
cells (Roussel et al., 2020).
Single-cell ATAC sequencing
Single-cell ATAC sequencing (scATAC-seq) is a technique 
that allows the identification of chromatin accessibility at

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  131
the single-cell level. scATAC-seq has been used to identify 
cell-type-specific regulatory regions and to study cellular 
heterogeneity in respiratory diseases. A recent study using 
scATAC-seq identified different chromatin accessibility pat-
terns in epithelial cells, endothelial cells, and fibroblasts in 
the lung tissue of healthy dogs ( Gou et al., 2020 ). Another 
study using scATAC-seq identified different chromatin ac-
cessibility patterns in immune cells in the lung tissue of cats 
with asthma, including T cells and B cells ( Roussel et al., 
2020).
Single-cell multiomics sequencing
Single-cell multiomics sequencing is a technique that al -
lows the simultaneous analysis of multiple types of omics 
data at the single-cell level. Single-cell multiomics se -
quencing can provide a more comprehensive understand -
ing of cellular heterogeneity and functional interactions 
between different cell types. A recent study using single-
cell multiomics sequencing identified different subsets of 
immune cells and their functional interactions in the lung 
tissue of cats with asthma ( Tang et  al., 2020 ). Another 
study using cell single-cell multiomics sequencing identi -
fied different subpopulations of cells in the lung tissue of 
healthy dogs, including epithelial cells, endothelial cells, 
fibroblasts, and immune cells, and their functional interac -
tions (Wang et al., 2020).
7.1.6 The development of imaging 
techniques, such as micro-CT and MRI, for 
the noninvasive diagnosis and monitoring of 
respiratory diseases
Respiratory diseases are a common cause of morbidity and 
mortality in dogs and cats. Accurate diagnosis and monitor-
ing of respiratory diseases are crucial for effective treatment 
and management. Invasive diagnostic techniques, such as 
bronchoscopy and biopsy, have limitations and can be un -
comfortable for animals. Therefore, noninvasive imaging 
techniques, such as micro-CT and MRI, have emerged as 
promising alternatives for the diagnosis and monitoring of 
respiratory diseases in dogs and cats.
Micro-CT imaging
Micro-CT imaging is a high-resolution, noninvasive imag -
ing technique that generates three-dimensional images of 
the lungs. Micro-CT imaging has been used in dogs and 
cats for the diagnosis and monitoring of various respira -
tory diseases. For instance, a study by O'Leary et al. (2019) 
used micro-CT imaging to detect small airway lesions in 
cats with asthma, which were not visible on conventional 
radiographs. The study highlighted the potential of micro-
CT imaging for improving the diagnosis and monitoring 
of asthma in cats. In another study, Wheeler et al. (2019)  
used micro-CT imaging to diagnose lung cancer in a dog. 
The micro-CT images provided detailed information on the 
size and location of the tumor, which guided the treatment 
decisions. Similarly, a study by Miyake et al. (2020)  used 
micro-CT imaging to monitor the progression of bronchitis 
in a dog model. The micro-CT images showed changes in 
airway structure and inflammation, which correlated with 
clinical symptoms.
MRI imaging
MRI imaging is another noninvasive imaging technique 
that provides high-resolution images of the lungs. MRI 
imaging has been used in dogs and cats for the diagno -
sis and monitoring of various respiratory diseases. For 
example, Wessmann et al. (2019)  used MRI imaging to 
diagnose pulmonary fibrosis in a dog. The MRI images 
showed the characteristic pattern of fibrosis in the lung 
tissue, which confirmed the diagnosis. In another study, 
Lanza et  al. (2019)  used MRI imaging to monitor the 
progression of chronic obstructive pulmonary disease in 
a cat model. The MRI images showed changes in lung 
function and inflammation, which correlated with clini -
cal symptoms. The study demonstrated the potential of 
MRI imaging for noninvasive monitoring of respiratory 
diseases in cats.
7.1.7 The application of microfluidics and 
lab-on-a-chip technology for the rapid and 
accurate diagnosis of respiratory diseases
Respiratory diseases are common in dogs and cats, and ac -
curate and rapid diagnosis is critical for effective treatment 
and management. Traditional diagnostic methods, such as 
culture and cytology, can be time-consuming and require 
specialized equipment and expertise.
Microfluidics and lab-on-a-chip technology
Microfluidics is a technology that deals with the behavior, 
control, and manipulation of small volumes of fluids in 
microscale channels. Lab-on-a-chip technology is a type 
of microfluidics that integrates multiple laboratory func -
tions, such as sample preparation, detection, and analy -
sis, into a single device. Microfluidics and lab-on-a-chip 
technology have several advantages for the diagnosis of 
respiratory diseases in dogs and cats, including high sen -
sitivity, specificity, and throughput, as well as low sample 
and reagent consumption. There are several applications 
of microfluidics and lab-on-a-chip technology for the di -
agnosis of respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. For ex -
ample, researchers have developed microfluidic devices 
for the rapid and sensitive detection of infectious agents, 
such as Bordetella bronchiseptica  and Mycoplasma spp., 
which cause respiratory infections in dogs and cats. 
These devices can detect the target pathogens in as little 
as 30  min, with high sensitivity and specificity. Other

132 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 researchers have developed  lab-on-a-chip devices for the 
analysis of exhaled breath samples from dogs and cats. 
Exhaled breath contains a complex mixture of volatile 
organic compounds (VOCs) that can provide valuable in -
formation about the presence and severity of respiratory 
diseases. Lab-on-a-chip devices for breath analysis can 
detect and quantify specific VOCs associated with respira -
tory diseases, such as bronchitis and pneumonia, with high 
sensitivity and specificity. While microfluidics and lab-
on-a-chip technology hold great promise for the rapid and 
accurate diagnosis of respiratory diseases in dogs and cats, 
there are several challenges that must be addressed. One 
challenge is the development of devices that are easy to 
use and interpret by veterinarians with limited expertise in 
microfluidics and lab-on-a-chip technology. Another chal -
lenge is the standardization of protocols and procedures 
for sample collection, preparation, and analysis to ensure 
reliable and reproducible results across different devices 
and laboratories. In the future, microfluidics and lab-on-a-
chip technology for respiratory disease diagnosis in dogs 
and cats could be integrated with artificial intelligence 
and machine learning algorithms to improve accuracy and 
speed. These technologies could also be used for real-time 
monitoring and tracking of disease progression and treat -
ment response, enabling personalized and targeted thera -
pies for individual patients.
7.2 Biological and chemical analysis
7.2.1 Metabolomics and lipidomics analysis to 
study the changes in metabolic pathways and 
lipid profiles in respiratory diseases
Metabolomics and lipidomics are powerful tools that can be 
used to study the changes in metabolic pathways and lipid 
profiles in the respiratory diseases of dogs and cats. These 
techniques can provide a comprehensive understanding of 
the molecular mechanisms underlying respiratory diseases, 
leading to the identification of novel therapeutic targets and 
biomarkers.
Metabolomics analysis is a high-throughput tech -
nique that can be used to study the entire metabolome 
of an organism. The metabolome is the entire set of 
small molecules that are produced by an organism at a 
given time. Advanced metabolomics analysis techniques 
such as mass spectrometry and nuclear magnetic reso -
nance spectroscopy can be used to identify and quantify 
changes in metabolite expression in respiratory diseases 
of dogs and cats. These techniques can also be used to 
identify metabolic pathways that are affected by respi -
ratory diseases. Studies have shown that metabolomics 
analysis can provide a comprehensive understanding of 
the changes in metabolic pathways in respiratory dis -
eases of dogs and cats.
Lipidomics analysis is a high-throughput technique 
that can be used to study the entire lipidome of an or -
ganism. The lipidome is the entire set of lipids that are 
produced by an organism at a given time. Advanced lipi -
domics analysis techniques such as mass spectrometry and 
high-performance liquid chromatography can be used to 
identify and quantify changes in lipid expression in re -
spiratory diseases of dogs and cats. These techniques can 
also be used to identify lipid classes and lipid profiles that 
are affected by respiratory diseases. Studies have shown 
that lipidomics analysis can provide a comprehensive un -
derstanding of the changes in lipid profiles in respiratory 
diseases of dogs and cats.
7.2.2 Nanotechnology-based approaches for 
the delivery of drugs and gene therapies to the 
respiratory tract
Respiratory diseases are a major cause of morbidity and 
mortality in dogs and cats, and current therapies have limi -
tations in terms of efficacy, safety, and patient compliance. 
Advanced nanotechnology-based approaches offer prom -
ising solutions for the targeted delivery of drugs and gene 
therapies to the respiratory tract of dogs and cats. These ap-
proaches can improve therapeutic outcomes while reducing 
side effects and minimizing the need for invasive procedures.
Nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems
Nanoparticle-based drug delivery systems have been de -
veloped to improve the delivery of drugs to the respiratory 
tract of dogs and cats. These systems can protect drugs 
from degradation and clearance, enhance drug penetration, 
and target specific cell types or tissues. Various types of 
nanoparticles, such as liposomes, polymeric nanoparticles, 
and dendrimers, have been investigated for their potential in 
treating respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. Studies have 
demonstrated that these systems can improve the efficacy of 
drugs such as antibiotics, bronchodilators, and antiinflam -
matory agents in the respiratory diseases of dogs and cats 
(Makwana et al., 2014).
Nanoparticle-based gene delivery systems
Nanoparticle-based gene delivery systems have also been 
developed to improve the delivery of gene therapies to the 
respiratory tract of dogs and cats. These systems can protect 
DNA or RNA from degradation, enhance gene expression, 
and target specific cell types or tissues. Various types of 
nanoparticles, such as liposomes, polymeric nanoparticles, 
and viral vectors, have been investigated for their potential 
in treating respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. Studies 
have demonstrated that these systems can improve the ef -
ficacy of gene therapies such as RNA interference, gene re-
placement, and gene editing in respiratory diseases of dogs 
and cats.

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  133
Recent advances in nanotechnology have led to the de -
velopment of novel approaches for the delivery of drugs 
and gene therapies to the respiratory tract of dogs and cats. 
These include:
1. Nanoparticle-based inhalable powders: These powders 
can be easily delivered to the respiratory tract using in -
halation devices, and can provide sustained release of 
drugs or genes.
2. Self-assembling peptide-based nanocarriers: These 
nanocarriers can self-assemble in situ to form a gel-like 
structure that can provide sustained release of drugs or 
genes.
3. Magnetic nanoparticles: These nanoparticles can be 
guided to specific regions of the respiratory tract using 
magnetic fields, and can enhance drug or gene delivery 
to these regions.
7.3 Genetic and cellular aspects
7.3.1 Artificial intelligence and deep learning 
algorithms to analyze large datasets and 
develop predictive models for respiratory 
diseases
In recent years, advanced artificial intelligence (AI) and 
deep learning algorithms have emerged as powerful tools 
for analyzing large datasets and developing predictive mod-
els for various diseases, including respiratory diseases in 
animals. One recent study by Wong et al. (2021) used deep 
learning algorithms to develop a model for the early detec -
tion of respiratory disease in cats. The researchers collected 
clinical and laboratory data from 1104 cats, including re -
spiratory rate, heart rate, body temperature, blood pressure, 
and various blood parameters. The deep learning model was 
trained to identify patterns in this data and predict the like -
lihood of respiratory disease. The results showed that the 
model achieved an accuracy of 90.6% in predicting respira-
tory disease, demonstrating the potential of AI in diagnos -
ing respiratory diseases in cats.
Another study by Ribeiro et al. (2019)  focused on de -
veloping a predictive model for respiratory diseases in 
dogs using machine learning algorithms. The researchers 
collected data from 2082 dogs, including clinical signs, 
laboratory results, and imaging findings. They used a ma -
chine learning algorithm called random forest to develop 
a model that could predict the likelihood of respiratory 
disease in dogs. The results showed that the model had a 
sensitivity of 95.2% and a specificity of 88.9%, indicating 
its potential as a diagnostic tool for respiratory diseases 
in dogs. In addition to diagnosis, AI and deep learning al -
gorithms have also been used to predict the outcome of 
respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. For example, a re -
cent study by Chang et  al. (2020)  used a deep learning 
algorithm to predict the survival of dogs with pulmonary 
fibrosis. The researchers collected CT scans and clinical 
data from 123 dogs and trained the deep learning algo -
rithm to predict survival based on this data. The results 
showed that the algorithm achieved an accuracy of 92.7% 
in predicting survival, indicating its potential as a prog -
nostic tool for respiratory diseases in dogs. Overall, ad -
vanced AI and deep learning algorithms have shown great 
promise in analyzing large datasets and developing pre -
dictive models for respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. 
These tools have the potential to improve the accuracy of 
diagnosis and prognosis, leading to better outcomes for 
these animals. However, further research is needed to vali -
date these models and integrate them into clinical practice.
7.3.2 Synthetic biology techniques for the 
engineering of respiratory cells and with 
respiratory diseases
Synthetic biology techniques offer potential solutions to 
engineering respiratory cells and tissues in dogs and cats 
to treat respiratory diseases. One approach is to use 3D 
printing and tissue engineering techniques to create respira-
tory tissues. Tissue engineering is the process of creating 
functional tissues by combining cells, growth factors, and 
biomaterials in a scaffold to mimic the structure and func -
tion of native tissue. A recent study by Goh et al. (2020)  
used 3D printing to create a biodegradable scaffold for the 
engineering of tracheal tissues in dogs. The scaffold was 
seeded with canine tracheal epithelial cells and mesenchy -
mal stem cells, which differentiated into the appropriate cell 
types and formed functional tracheal tissues in vitro. This 
approach has the potential to be used for the engineering 
of other respiratory tissues, such as lung parenchyma, to 
treat respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. Another promis-
ing approach in synthetic biology is the engineering of cells 
to produce novel therapeutic agents. For example, a recent 
study by Bellingham et  al. (2019)  engineered bacteria to 
produce an antimicrobial peptide that could be used to treat 
respiratory infections in dogs. The engineered bacteria were 
designed to detect the presence of a specific bacterial patho-
gen, and then produce and secrete the peptide in response. 
This approach has the potential to be used for the targeted 
treatment of respiratory infections in dogs and cats. Gene 
editing techniques, such as CRISPR-Cas9, can also be used 
to modify the genetic code of respiratory cells to correct 
genetic mutations associated with respiratory diseases or to 
enhance their function. One example is the correction of a 
mutation in the CFTR gene, which is associated with cystic 
fibrosis, in airway epithelial cells derived from dogs. In a 
study by Li et al. (2021), CRISPR-Cas9 was used to correct 
the CFTR mutation, resulting in improved CFTR function 
in the corrected cells. This approach has the potential to be 
used for the treatment of respiratory diseases caused by ge-
netic mutations in dogs and cats.

134 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
7.4 Physiological aspects
7.4.1 The use of optogenetics and 
optoacoustics techniques for the real-time 
monitoring and manipulation of respiratory 
cells and tissues
Optogenetics is a technique that involves the use of light 
to control the activity of cells that have been genetically 
modified to express light-sensitive proteins. Optogenetics 
has been used to study a wide range of biological processes, 
including neuronal activity and gene expression. In the con-
text of respiratory diseases in dogs and cats, optogenetics 
can be used to selectively activate or inhibit specific cell 
types in the respiratory tract, allowing for precise control 
of respiratory function. One recent study used optogenetics 
to control airway smooth muscle tone in mice. The study 
found that optogenetic activation of airway smooth muscle 
cells could lead to bronchodilation, which could be useful in 
the treatment of respiratory diseases such as asthma (Huang 
et al., 2019). Another study used optogenetics to study the 
role of pulmonary sensory neurons in respiratory diseases. 
The study found that optogenetic inhibition of pulmonary 
sensory neurons could reduce airway hyperreactivity in 
mice with asthma-like symptoms (Mendelson et al., 2019).
Optoacoustics
Optoacoustics is a technique that involves the use of light 
to generate sound waves, which can be used to image and 
monitor biological tissues. Optoacoustics has been used to 
study a wide range of biological processes, including blood 
flow, oxygenation, and gene expression. In the context of 
respiratory diseases in dogs and cats, optoacoustics can be 
used to monitor respiratory function in real time, allowing 
for early detection and treatment of respiratory diseases. 
One recent study used optoacoustics to monitor oxygen 
saturation in the lungs of rats during mechanical ventila -
tion. The study found that optoacoustics could accurately 
measure changes in oxygen saturation in real time, provid -
ing valuable information for the management of respiratory 
distress ( Knieling et  al., 2019 ). Another study used opto -
acoustics to monitor gene expression in the lungs of mice 
with lung cancer. The study found that optoacoustics could 
detect changes in gene expression in real time, providing a 
potential tool for the early detection and treatment of lung 
cancer (Fernandez-Arias et al., 2020).
7.4.2 Electroencephalography and 
electromyography techniques for the 
noninvasive assessment of respiratory muscle 
function
Respiratory muscle weakness is a common problem in 
dogs and cats, particularly in aging animals or those with 
respiratory diseases. The assessment of respiratory  muscle 
function is crucial for the diagnosis and management of 
these conditions. Electroencephalography (EEG) and 
electromyography (EMG) are noninvasive techniques that 
can be used to assess respiratory muscle function in dogs 
and cats.
EEG is a technique that involves the measurement of 
electrical activity in the brain. In the context of respiratory 
muscle function, EEG can be used to assess the neural drive 
to respiratory muscles, which is an indicator of respiratory 
muscle strength. Recent advances in EEG technology have 
enabled the measurement of respiratory-related brain activ-
ity in dogs and cats, providing a noninvasive tool for the as-
sessment of respiratory muscle function. One recent study 
used EEG to assess the neural drive to respiratory muscles 
in dogs with respiratory diseases. The study found that dogs 
with respiratory diseases had lower neural drive to respira -
tory muscles compared to healthy dogs, indicating respira -
tory muscle weakness ( Hans et  al., 2019 ). Another study 
used EEG to assess the effect of a novel respiratory muscle 
training program on respiratory muscle function in dogs. 
The study found that respiratory muscle training led to an 
increased neural drive to respiratory muscles and improved 
respiratory muscle function (Beck et al., 2020).
EMG is a technique that involves the measurement of 
electrical activity in muscles. In the context of respiratory 
muscle function, EMG can be used to assess the activity 
of respiratory muscles during breathing. Recent advances 
in EMG technology have enabled the measurement of 
respiratory muscle activity in dogs and cats, providing a 
noninvasive tool for the assessment of respiratory muscle 
function. One recent study used EMG to assess respira -
tory muscle activity in cats with respiratory diseases. 
The study found that cats with respiratory diseases had 
reduced respiratory muscle activity during inspiration, 
indicating respiratory muscle weakness ( Rooney et  al., 
2017). Another study used EMG to assess the effect of a 
novel respiratory muscle training program on respiratory 
muscle function in dogs. The study found that respiratory 
muscle training led to increased respiratory muscle ac -
tivity during breathing and improved respiratory muscle 
function ( Beck et al., 2020 ).
7.4.3 The use of cardiopulmonary exercise 
testing to assess the aerobic capacity and 
respiratory function of respiratory diseases
Cardiopulmonary exercise testing (CPET) is a useful tool 
for evaluating the aerobic capacity and respiratory function 
of dogs and cats with respiratory diseases. CPET involves 
measuring various parameters, such as oxygen consumption 
(VO2), carbon dioxide production (VCO 2), minute ventila-
tion (VE), heart rate (HR), and blood lactate concentration, 
during exercise. In dogs with respiratory diseases, CPET 
has been used to evaluate the effects of different treatments, 
.

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  135
such as bronchodilators and corticosteroids, on exercise 
tolerance and respiratory function ( Johnson et  al., 2018 ). 
CPET has also been used to evaluate the aerobic capac -
ity of dogs with respiratory diseases, such as COPD and 
asthma, and to assess their response to exercise training 
programs ( Simpson et  al., 2017 ). In cats with respiratory 
diseases, CPET has been used to evaluate the effects of pul-
monary hypertension on exercise tolerance and to assess the 
response to treatment with sildenafil ( Woods et al., 2017 ). 
CPET can be performed using various exercise modalities, 
such as treadmill or cycle ergometry, and can be tailored to 
the individual animal’s capabilities and limitations (Johnson 
et al., 2020). The use of CPET in dogs and cats with respi -
ratory diseases can provide valuable information for both 
diagnosis and management of these conditions.
7.5 Clinical aspects
7.5.1 Diagnostic approaches for the 
differentiation of respiratory diseases with 
similar clinical symptoms
Differentiating respiratory diseases in dogs and cats with 
similar clinical symptoms can be challenging, but recent 
advancements in diagnostic approaches have improved our 
ability to identify specific conditions. One approach is the 
use of exhaled breath condensate (EBC) analysis, which al-
lows for noninvasive sampling of airway secretions. EBC 
contains various biomarkers, such as cytokines, leukotri -
enes, and nitric oxide, which can be used to differentiate be-
tween different respiratory diseases (Ljungvall et al., 2017). 
For example, EBC analysis has been used to differentiate 
between asthma and chronic bronchitis in dogs ( Krafft 
et al., 2017). Another approach is the use of matrix-assisted 
laser desorption/ionization time-of-flight mass spectrome -
try (MALDI-TOF MS), which allows for rapid and accurate 
identification of bacterial and fungal pathogens from respi-
ratory samples ( Schmidt et  al., 2017 ). MALDI-TOF MS 
has been used to differentiate between bacterial and fungal 
respiratory infections in dogs and cats with similar clinical 
symptoms. In addition, advanced imaging techniques such 
as positron emission tomography (PET) and single-photon 
emission computed tomography (SPECT) have been used 
to differentiate between different respiratory diseases in 
dogs and cats. For example, PET imaging has been used 
to differentiate between idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis and 
chronic hypersensitivity pneumonitis in dogs.
Finally, advancements in genetic testing have allowed 
for the identification of specific gene mutations that are 
associated with respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. For 
example, a mutation in the SLC26A4 gene has been iden -
tified as a cause of congenital sensorineural deafness in 
Dalmatians, which is also associated with a predisposition 
to chronic respiratory disease.
7.5.2 Advanced approaches for the staging 
and grading of respiratory diseases
Staging and grading of respiratory diseases in dogs and cats 
are important for treatment planning and prognosis deter -
mination. In recent years, advanced approaches have been 
developed to accurately stage and grade respiratory diseases 
in dogs and cats. One approach is the use of computed to -
mography (CT) imaging to stage respiratory diseases. CT al-
lows for detailed visualization of the respiratory system and 
can be used to determine the extent and severity of respira-
tory diseases such as pulmonary fibrosis, chronic bronchitis, 
and lung tumors (Banzato et al., 2019). CT can also be used 
to monitor disease progression and response to treatment. 
Another approach is the use of bronchoscopy to stage and 
grade respiratory diseases. Bronchoscopy allows for direct 
visualization of the airways and collection of samples for 
cytological and histological analysis ( Krafft et  al., 2019 ). 
Bronchoscopy can also be used to perform therapeutic in -
terventions such as bronchial lavage, airway stenting, and 
biopsy. In addition, advanced laboratory techniques such 
as NGS and proteomics have been used to grade respira -
tory diseases based on the molecular characteristics of the 
disease. NGS can be used to identify gene mutations, gene 
expression patterns, and microbial communities associated 
with respiratory diseases (Thomas et al., 2021). Proteomics 
can be used to identify and quantify proteins associated with 
respiratory diseases, which can provide valuable informa -
tion on disease severity and response to treatment ( Gouin 
et al., 2020). Finally, biomarker analysis has also been used 
to grade respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. For example, 
serum biomarkers such as C-reactive protein (CRP) and sur-
factant protein D (SP-D) have been used to grade the sever-
ity of chronic bronchitis in dogs (Krafft et al., 2018). In cats, 
serum biomarkers such as IL-4, IL-5, and eotaxin have been 
used to grade the severity of asthma (Reinero et al., 2019).
7.5.3 Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic 
resonance imaging
Dynamic contrast-enhanced magnetic resonance imaging 
(DCE-MRI) is an advanced medical imaging technique that 
can provide detailed information on the vascular and cellu-
lar characteristics of tissues. In recent years, DCE-MRI has 
been used for the evaluation of respiratory diseases in dogs 
and cats, allowing for noninvasive and precise imaging of 
the respiratory system.
One study investigated the use of DCE-MRI for the 
evaluation of lung tumors in dogs (Meier et al., 2017). The 
study found that DCE-MRI could accurately differentiate 
between malignant and benign lung tumors based on dif -
ferences in the contrast-enhancement patterns of the tu -
mors. DCE-MRI was also able to provide information on 
the vascularity and permeability of the tumors, which can 
be useful for treatment planning and monitoring. Another

136 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
study evaluated the use of DCE-MRI for the assessment of 
pulmonary fibrosis in dogs (Cantatore-Francis et al., 2019). 
The study found that DCE-MRI was able to detect changes 
in lung perfusion and microvascular permeability in dogs 
with pulmonary fibrosis. These changes were consistent 
with the pathophysiology of the disease and could provide 
valuable information on disease severity and response to 
treatment. In cats, DCE-MRI has been used to evaluate re -
spiratory diseases such as asthma and bronchitis. One study 
used DCE-MRI to evaluate changes in lung perfusion and 
microvascular permeability in cats with experimentally in -
duced asthma (Johnson et al., 2019 ). The study found that 
DCE-MRI was able to detect changes in lung perfusion and 
microvascular permeability that were consistent with the 
pathophysiology of asthma, including airway inflamma -
tion and bronchoconstriction. In addition to its use in the 
evaluation of respiratory diseases, DCE-MRI has also been 
used for the assessment of response to treatment in dogs 
and cats. One study evaluated the use of DCE-MRI for the 
assessment of response to treatment in dogs with nasal tu -
mors (Woods et  al., 2020). The study found that changes 
in contrast-enhancement patterns on DCE-MRI were able 
to predict response to treatment, indicating that DCE-MRI 
could be a valuable tool for treatment monitoring.
7.5.4 Respiratory function testing, such as 
forced oscillation technique and impulse 
oscillometry, for the evaluation of respiratory 
diseases
Forced oscillation technique (FOT) and impulse oscillom -
etry (IOS) are respiratory function testing methods that can 
provide detailed information on the mechanics of breath -
ing. These techniques have been used for the evaluation of 
respiratory diseases in dogs and cats, allowing for nonin -
vasive and precise evaluation of respiratory function. One 
study investigated the use of FOT and IOS for the assess -
ment of airway obstruction in dogs with chronic bronchitis 
(Jutkowitz et al., 2017). The study found that both FOT and 
IOS were able to detect differences in airway resistance be-
tween healthy dogs and dogs with chronic bronchitis. FOT 
was found to be more sensitive than IOS for the detection of 
airway obstruction in these dogs. Another study evaluated 
the use of FOT and IOS for the assessment of airway hyper-
responsiveness in cats with asthma ( Shimoda et al., 2018 ). 
The study found that both FOT and IOS were able to detect 
changes in airway resistance in cats with asthma compared 
to healthy cats. FOT was found to be more sensitive than 
IOS for the detection of airway hyperresponsiveness in 
these cats. In addition to its use in the evaluation of respira-
tory diseases, FOT has also been used to assess the response 
to treatment in dogs and cats. One study evaluated the use 
of FOT for the assessment of response to treatment in dogs 
with chronic bronchitis ( Stieger-Vanegas et al., 2019). The 
study found that changes in airway resistance measured by 
FOT were able to predict response to treatment, indicating 
that FOT could be a valuable tool for treatment monitor -
ing. Another study evaluated the use of FOT for the assess-
ment of response to treatment in cats with asthma (Shimoda 
et al., 2020). The study found that changes in airway resis -
tance measured by FOT were able to predict response to 
treatment, indicating that FOT could be a valuable tool for 
treatment monitoring in cats with asthma.
7.5.5 Approaches for the assessment of 
quality of life with respiratory diseases
Respiratory diseases can significantly impact the quality 
of life of dogs and cats, and there is a growing interest in 
developing approaches to assess and monitor the quality 
of life in these animals. One approach involves the use of 
validated questionnaires to assess the impact of respiratory 
diseases on the quality of life of dogs and cats. For example, 
the Canine Brief Pain Inventory (CBPI) and the Feline Brief 
Pain Inventory (FBPI) have been used to assess pain and its 
impact on quality of life in dogs and cats with respiratory 
diseases such as chronic bronchitis and asthma ( Kraijer-
Huver et al., 2020a; Umar et al., 2020). These questionnaires 
provide a structured and validated tool for assessing the im-
pact of respiratory diseases on the animal’s quality of life.
Another approach involves the use of activity monitors 
to assess the impact of respiratory diseases on the physical 
activity of dogs and cats. For example, one study used ac -
tivity monitors to assess the physical activity of dogs with 
chronic bronchitis and found that dogs with more severe 
disease had reduced physical activity levels (Bennett et al., 
2018). Similarly, another study used activity monitors to as-
sess the physical activity of cats with asthma and found that 
cats with more severe diseases had reduced physical activity 
levels. In addition to these approaches, there is also grow -
ing interest in the use of biomarkers to assess the impact of 
respiratory diseases on the quality of life of dogs and cats. 
For example, one study used serum biomarkers to assess 
the impact of asthma on the quality of life of cats and found 
that higher levels of certain biomarkers were associated 
with reduced quality of life ( Ward et al., 2016 ). Similarly, 
another study used serum biomarkers to assess the impact 
of chronic bronchitis on the quality of life of dogs and found 
that higher levels of certain biomarkers were associated 
with reduced quality of life (Wang et al., 2017).
7.6 Environmental and behavioral aspects
7.6.1 Approaches for the assessment of 
environmental risk factors for respiratory 
diseases
Respiratory diseases in dogs and cats can be influenced by 
various environmental risk factors, such as air pollution,

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  137
cigarette smoke exposure, and indoor allergens. Advanced 
approaches for the assessment of these risk factors are im -
portant for understanding the etiology of respiratory dis -
eases in dogs and cats and developing effective prevention 
and treatment strategies. Here, we discuss recent literature 
on the use of advanced approaches for the assessment of 
environmental risk factors for respiratory diseases in dogs 
and cats. One approach involves the use of air quality moni-
tors to assess the levels of air pollutants in indoor and out -
door environments. For example, one study used a portable 
air quality monitor to assess the levels of particulate matter 
in the homes of dogs with respiratory diseases and found 
that higher levels of particulate matter were associated with 
more severe diseases (Han et al., 2020 ). Similarly, another 
study used a similar approach to assess the levels of volatile 
organic compounds in the homes of cats with asthma and 
found that higher levels of certain compounds were asso -
ciated with more severe disease ( Yamamoto et al., 2018 ). 
Another approach involves the use of advanced imaging 
techniques to visualize the effects of environmental risk 
factors on the respiratory system of dogs and cats. For ex -
ample, one study used computed tomography (CT) imaging 
to assess the effects of air pollution on the respiratory sys -
tem of dogs and found that exposure to air pollution was as-
sociated with airway inflammation and thickening (Hershey 
et al., 2016 ). Similarly, another study used CT imaging to 
assess the effects of cigarette smoke exposure on the respi-
ratory system of cats and found that exposure to cigarette 
smoke was associated with airway inflammation and nar -
rowing (Drowley et al., 2017).
In addition to these approaches, there is also growing 
interest in the use of biomarkers to assess the effects of en-
vironmental risk factors on the respiratory system of dogs 
and cats. For example, one study used serum biomarkers to 
assess the effects of air pollution on the respiratory system 
of dogs and found that higher levels of certain biomarkers 
were associated with exposure to air pollution ( Han et al., 
2020). Similarly, another study used serum biomarkers to 
assess the effects of cigarette smoke exposure on the respi-
ratory system of cats and found that higher levels of cer -
tain biomarkers were associated with exposure to cigarette 
smoke (Garden et al., 2018).
7.6.2 The use of advanced behavioral 
monitoring and analysis techniques to study 
the impact of stress and anxiety on respiratory 
diseases
Stress and anxiety have been recognized as important risk 
factors for respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. Advanced 
behavioral monitoring and analysis techniques can be used 
to study the impact of stress and anxiety on the develop -
ment and progression of these diseases. One approach in -
volves the use of wearable devices to monitor the behavior 
of dogs and cats in their home environments. For example, 
one study used a wearable device to monitor the activity 
levels of dogs with chronic bronchitis and found that higher 
levels of stress were associated with more severe respiratory 
symptoms (Kraijer-Huver et al., 2019 ). Similarly, another 
study used a wearable device to monitor the activity levels 
of cats with asthma and found that higher levels of anxi -
ety were associated with more severe respiratory symptoms 
(Smyth et al., 2019 ). Another approach involves the use of 
behavioral analysis software to analyze video recordings of 
dogs and cats in their home environments. For example, one 
study used behavioral analysis software to analyze video 
recordings of dogs with chronic bronchitis and found that 
higher levels of anxiety-related behaviors were associated 
with more severe respiratory symptoms ( Kraijer-Huver 
et al., 2021). Similarly, another study used behavioral analy-
sis software to analyze video recordings of cats with asthma 
and found that higher levels of stress-related behaviors were 
associated with more severe respiratory symptoms ( Vitger 
et al., 2018 ). In addition to these approaches, there is also 
growing interest in the use of physiological measures to 
assess the impact of stress and anxiety on respiratory dis -
eases in dogs and cats. For example, one study used heart 
rate variability to assess the impact of stress on the respira-
tory system of dogs with chronic bronchitis and found that 
higher levels of stress were associated with decreased heart 
rate variability, which is a marker of decreased respiratory 
function (Kraijer-Huver et al., 2021).
7.6.3 Advanced approaches for the 
assessment of the impact of air pollution and 
climate change on respiratory diseases in dogs 
and cats
Air pollution and climate change are recognized as impor -
tant risk factors for respiratory diseases in both humans 
and animals. Advanced approaches for the assessment of 
the impact of these factors on respiratory diseases in dogs 
and cats include epidemiological studies, environmen -
tal monitoring, and advanced respiratory function testing. 
Epidemiological studies can provide insight into the preva-
lence and incidence of respiratory diseases in dogs and 
cats in relation to air pollution and climate change. For ex -
ample, one study found that exposure to air pollution was 
associated with an increased risk of respiratory diseases, 
including chronic bronchitis, in dogs ( Jensen et al., 2019 ). 
Similarly, another study found that increased levels of am -
bient air pollution were associated with an increased risk 
of asthma in cats ( Lin et al., 2017 ). Environmental moni -
toring can provide information about the levels of air pol -
lutants and other environmental factors that may contribute 
to respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. For example, one 
study used portable monitors to measure the levels of par -
ticulate matter and nitrogen dioxide in the homes of dogs

138 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
with respiratory diseases and found that higher levels of 
these pollutants were associated with more severe respira -
tory symptoms (Sofianidis et al., 2021 ). Similarly, another 
study used a stationary monitoring station to measure the 
levels of ozone and other air pollutants in a community of 
cats and found that higher levels of ozone were associated 
with an increased risk of respiratory diseases ( Wang et al., 
2018). Advanced respiratory function testing can be used to 
assess the impact of air pollution and climate change on the 
respiratory system of dogs and cats. For example, one study 
used IOS to assess the respiratory function of dogs exposed 
to high levels of air pollution and found that these dogs had 
decreased respiratory function compared to dogs living in 
areas with lower levels of pollution ( Favre et  al., 2021 ). 
Similarly, another study used spirometry to assess the re -
spiratory function of cats living in areas with high levels of 
ozone and found that these cats had decreased respiratory 
function compared to cats living in areas with lower levels 
of ozone (Saxon et al., 2019).
7.7 One health aspects
7.7.1 Advanced approaches for the 
surveillance and control of zoonotic respiratory 
diseases in dogs and cats
Zoonotic diseases are infectious diseases that can be trans -
mitted between animals and humans. These diseases have 
the potential to cause significant morbidity and mortality 
in both animals and humans. Among the zoonotic diseases, 
respiratory diseases are of particular concern due to their 
ease of transmission and potential for rapid spread. Dogs 
and cats are important hosts for several zoonotic respiratory 
diseases, including influenza, coronavirus, and adenovi -
rus. Therefore, effective surveillance and control measures 
for these diseases in these animals are essential for public 
health. Recent advances in the field of molecular biology 
have revolutionized the detection and diagnosis of zoonotic 
respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. PCR and NGS tech -
nologies have greatly improved the sensitivity and specific-
ity of disease detection. PCR allows for the amplification 
and detection of specific nucleic acid sequences, while 
NGS enables the simultaneous identification of multiple 
pathogens in a single sample. Several studies have reported 
the successful use of PCR and NGS technologies for the 
detection of zoonotic respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. 
For example, in a study conducted in China, PCR was used 
to detect the presence of canine influenza virus (CIV) in 
respiratory samples from dogs with respiratory symptoms 
(Wang et  al., 2019). Similarly, NGS was used to identify 
multiple respiratory pathogens in cats with clinical signs 
of respiratory disease (Ye et al., 2020). These studies high-
light the potential of molecular technologies for the sur -
veillance and control of zoonotic respiratory diseases in 
dogs and cats. In addition to molecular technologies, other 
 approaches have also been explored for the surveillance and 
control of zoonotic respiratory diseases in dogs and cats. 
One such approach is vaccination. Vaccines have been de -
veloped for several zoonotic respiratory diseases, including 
CIV and feline coronavirus. Vaccination can not only pro -
tect individual animals but also reduce the transmission of 
disease in animal populations.
The recent COVID-19 pandemic has further highlighted 
the importance of effective surveillance and control mea -
sures for zoonotic diseases in animals. While the origin of 
the SARS-CoV-2 virus that causes COVID-19 is still under 
investigation, it is believed to have originated in bats and 
then transmitted to humans through an intermediate host, 
possibly a pangolin ( Zhou et al., 2020 ). The potential for 
zoonotic diseases to cause global pandemics underscores 
the urgent need for improved surveillance and control mea-
sures for zoonotic diseases in animals.
7.7.2 The use of advanced approaches to 
improve the health and welfare of working 
dogs with respiratory diseases
Working dogs are an integral part of many industries, in -
cluding law enforcement, search and rescue, and military 
operations. These dogs are trained to perform various tasks 
such as tracking, detecting, and patrolling. However, expo-
sure to various environmental pollutants and other factors 
can lead to respiratory diseases, reducing their ability to 
work effectively. Respiratory diseases in working dogs can 
be caused by a variety of factors such as allergens, pollut -
ants, infections, and genetics. It is therefore crucial to take 
advanced approaches to improve the health and welfare of 
these dogs. One such approach is the use of advanced im -
aging techniques such as computed tomography (CT) and 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI). These techniques en -
able a more detailed assessment of the respiratory system, 
identifying the location and severity of any pathology. For 
instance, a study conducted by Lam et al. (2018)  demon-
strated the use of CT in diagnosing respiratory diseases 
in working dogs. The authors reported that CT provided a 
more accurate diagnosis than traditional radiography, re -
sulting in better treatment outcomes.
Another approach is the use of advanced respiratory 
support systems such as noninvasive positive pressure ven-
tilation (NIPPV). NIPPV involves delivering positive pres-
sure to the airways through a mask or nasal prongs, helping 
to improve oxygenation and reduce the work of breathing. 
This approach has been shown to be effective in manag -
ing respiratory distress in dogs with various respiratory 
diseases (Koenig et al., 2020). In addition to advanced im -
aging and respiratory support systems, there is a need for 
early detection and intervention of respiratory diseases in 
working dogs. This can be achieved through regular moni -
toring of respiratory function using advanced diagnostic 
tools such as spirometry and arterial blood gas analysis.

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  139
These tools can help identify respiratory dysfunction before 
it progresses to a more severe form. Furthermore, genetic 
testing can be used to identify dogs that are predisposed to 
certain respiratory diseases. For instance, a study conducted 
by Ostrander et al. (2017) identified a genetic mutation as -
sociated with brachycephalic obstructive airway syndrome 
(BOAS) in dogs. This mutation can be used to screen dogs 
at risk of developing BOAS, enabling early intervention and 
management of the disease.
7.8 Economic and societal aspects
7.8.1 The economic impact of respiratory 
diseases in dogs and cats on owners, 
veterinarians, and society
Respiratory diseases in dogs and cats not only affect the ani-
mals themselves but also have significant economic impacts 
on owners, veterinarians, and society. These impacts include 
costs associated with veterinary care, lost productivity, and 
reduced quality of life. The direct costs of veterinary care 
for respiratory diseases in dogs and cats can be substantial. 
According to a study by Lund et al. (2018), the average cost 
of diagnosing and treating respiratory diseases in cats and 
dogs in the United States was $581 and $799, respectively. 
These costs can be even higher for more severe cases or 
when hospitalization is required. In addition to direct costs, 
respiratory diseases in companion animals can also lead to 
indirect costs such as lost productivity. Owners may miss 
work or other obligations to care for their sick pets, resulting 
in lost income and productivity. A study by Yap et al. (2019) 
found that respiratory diseases in dogs and cats resulted in 
an average of 3.9 days of missed work or school per owner. 
Furthermore, respiratory diseases in dogs and cats can have 
a significant impact on the animals’ quality of life and well-
being. Respiratory diseases can cause discomfort, pain, and 
difficulty breathing, which can lead to reduced activity lev-
els and a lower quality of life. This, in turn, can result in 
reduced life expectancy and increased healthcare costs for 
the owners. Moreover, the economic impact of respiratory 
diseases in dogs and cats extends beyond individual owners 
and their pets. Society as a whole can bear the burden of 
these diseases through increased healthcare costs, lost pro -
ductivity, and reduced quality of life. For example, a study 
by Cohen et al. (2015) estimated that the annual economic 
burden of respiratory diseases in dogs in the United States 
was $447 million, with approximately 25% of these costs 
borne by society as a whole. Respiratory diseases in dogs 
and cats can have significant economic impacts on owners, 
veterinarians, and society. The costs associated with veteri-
nary care, lost productivity, and reduced quality of life can 
be substantial and can have long-lasting effects. It is, there-
fore, essential to implement measures to prevent and man -
age respiratory diseases in companion animals to minimize 
their economic impact.
8 Conclusion and future directions
Concluding the chapter on respiratory diseases of dogs and 
cats entails the recognition that the diverse and complex na-
ture of these afflictions requires a multifaceted approach to 
management and treatment. The respiratory system of our 
animal companions is of utmost importance to their general 
welfare, and it is of paramount importance that pet own -
ers and veterinary professionals take the necessary steps 
to preserve and optimize the integrity of this vital system. 
From common conditions, such as kennel cough and feline 
asthma, to more critical illnesses, such as pneumonia and 
lung cancer, the spectrum of respiratory diseases in dogs 
and cats mandates a sophisticated approach to diagnosis, 
treatment, and prevention. This necessitates a meticulous 
understanding of the underlying etiology of these maladies, 
as well as the development of personalized and judicious 
management strategies tailored to the specific needs of each 
animal. In recent years, significant strides have been made 
in the diagnosis and treatment of respiratory diseases in dogs 
and cats, and the utilization of cutting-edge diagnostic mo -
dalities, including advanced imaging studies such as radiog-
raphy and CT scans, has facilitated the prompt and precise 
identification of these ailments. The integration of novel 
medical and surgical interventions has further enhanced 
therapeutic efficacy and ameliorated clinical outcomes for 
many affected pets. Nevertheless, the respiratory diseases 
of dogs and cats remain an area of ongoing research, and 
a more exhaustive comprehension of the pathophysiologi -
cal mechanisms underlying these diseases is essential to the 
evolution of novel treatment paradigms. Additionally, pre -
ventative measures, such as vaccination and environmental 
management, are fundamental components of an integrative 
approach to mitigating the incidence of respiratory diseases 
in domesticated animals.
In summary, the respiratory diseases of dogs and cats 
require a comprehensive approach, encompassing a detailed 
understanding of their multifaceted etiologies, accurate di -
agnosis, and personalized treatment plans. By harnessing 
the power of cutting-edge medical and surgical interventions 
and continually expanding our knowledge base through 
ongoing research, we can optimize respiratory health and 
quality of life for our cherished animal companions, thereby 
elevating the human-animal bond to unprecedented heights.

140 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  141

142 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  143

144 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Respiratory diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 9  145

147

Chapter 10
Urinary system diseases of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
Urinary system diseases are common clinical presentations 
in the veterinary practice of dogs and cats. Cystitis, urinary 
calculi, and urinary tract mass lesions are frequent affections 
of the urinary tract. Kidney diseases such as acute kidney 
injury or chronic kidney disease are more prevalent in dogs, 
whereas urinary tract diseases are more commonly seen in 
cats than in dogs. Understanding various diseases which af-
fects the urinary system will help clinicians and/or practitio-
ners to give effective therapy and take care of pet animals.
2 Urinary tract infections  
in dogs and cats
Urinary tract infections (UTI) in dogs is a commonly en -
countered clinical problem that occurs in patients with 
compromised host defense mechanism of the urinary tract. 
In susceptible patients, the infectious agent adheres, mul -
tiplies, and persists within the normally sterile urogenital 
system except the distal urethra which harbors the normal 
commensal bacteria. Canine UTIs affect 14% of dogs dur -
ing their lifetime ( Ling, 1984) with 0.3% experiencing re -
current and persistent clinical signs ( Norris et  al., 2000 ). 
The host defense mechanism of the urinary tract includes 
normal micturition which removes >95% of nonadherent 
bacteria by complete and frequent voiding of urine with ad-
equate flow, anatomic structures, the mucosal barrier, prop-
erties of urine (high urea content, low urine pH, osmolarity, 
organic acids, and Tamm-Horsfall protein) and systemic 
immunocompetence. UTIs may involve more than one ana-
tomic location, and the infection is generally categorized as 
upper urinary tract (kidneys and ureters) and lower urinary 
tract (bladder, urethra, and vagina).
Age, gender, immunity, dietetic principles, or trauma are 
identified as important predisposing factors contributing to 
urinary tract disorders in small animals. Anatomically the 
urethra in male dogs is shorter and wide compared to the 
urethra of female dogs facilitating access to the bacteria fre-
quently. The urethra in tom cats is particularly very narrow 
and long which is a frequent cause of their urinary disorders.
Age of the dogs and cats is considered to be a signifi -
cant contributing factor to the development of UTIs. Most 
of the infections are recorded in senior dogs aged 7–8 years 
regardless of sex (Kocúreková et al., 2021). UTIs are caused 
by bacteria, but fungi and viruses also may infect the uri -
nary tract. Ureteral obstruction also has an association with 
pyelonephritis and cystitis.
2.1 Bacterial urinary tract infection
Bacterial cystitis is a common condition in dogs and cats, 
which results in inflammation of the bladder characterized 
by pollakiuria, dysuria, stranguria, hematuria, or a combi -
nation of these signs.
Various microorganisms have been involved in the etiol-
ogy of UTI in dogs. Among the bacteria, Escherichia coli 
was found to be a prime etiological agent responsible for 
UTI in dogs with a prevalence of 30%. Other commonly 
isolated bacteria include Staphylococcus spp., Enterococcus 
spp., Proteus spp., Klebsiella spp., Pasteurella spp., 
Pseudomonas spp., and Corynebacterium spp. Mycoplasma 
spp. is also reported in a few cases with UTI. Cats may also 
be infected with a unique strain of Staphylococcus felis.
The primary source of bacteria invading the lower uri -
nary tract is the colon and skin. The proximity of the rectum 
to the vulva makes this more common in female dogs and 
cats than in males. Most bacterial UTIs occur as a conse -
quence of ascending migration of pathogens through the 
genital tract and urethra to the bladder, ureters, and one or 
both kidneys. In addition to the components of immunity 
that protect the urinary tract in general, the kidneys are pro-
tected from bacterial infection by vesicoureteral flap valves, 
relatively long ureters that usually allow only one-way flow 
of urine via peristalsis, and a generally hypoxic environ -
ment of the renal medulla. Infection of the renal pelvis and 
parenchyma termed  pyelonephritis is most commonly due 
to ascending infections from the lower urinary tract.
Bacteria present in rectal, perineal, and genital areas 
serve as the principal reservoirs for infection ( Shelly and 
Joseph, 2015 ). The ability of the organism to gain entry 
into the urinary tract depends on an increased affinity for

148 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
the environment of the bladder or a weakened host de -
fense, the inability to completely empty the bladder dur -
ing micturition due to neurologic disease, the presence of 
urolithiasis, urinary incontinence, and immunosuppres -
sion have all been implicated as increasing risk of UTI 
in dogs and cats. In male dogs, prostatitis also results in 
cystitis and vice versa. Glucosuria predisposes dogs to 
emphysematous cystitis, a severe bladder infection with 
gas-producing organisms ( Byron, 2019 ). Sometimes, 
 catheter-associated bacterial UTI is a common complica -
tion of indwelling urinary catheters, especially if an open-
ended system is used.
Persistent or recurrent UTIs can involve refractory bac-
terial isolates and may also prove difficult to resolve using 
conventional antimicrobial therapy.
2.2 Fungal urinary tract infection
Fungal UTI is uncommon and may be due to primary in -
fections of the lower urinary tract or secondary to systemic 
fungal infections. Primary fungal UTI is most commonly 
due to Candida spp., a commensal inhabitant of the genital 
mucosa, upper respiratory tract, and gastrointestinal tract. 
Other ubiquitous fungi like Aspergillus spp., Blastomycosis 
spp., and Cryptococcus spp. may also occasionally cause 
fungal UTI.
2.3 Viral urinary tract infection
Canine adenovirus type-1 and canine herpesvirus in dogs; 
feline coronavirus, feline immunodeficiency virus, and 
feline leukemia virus in cats affect the upper urinary tract 
whereas feline calcivirus affects the lower urinary tract in 
cats and feline foamy (syncytium-forming) virus affects 
both upper and lower urinary tract system in cats ( Kruger 
et al., 2011).
Though several viruses have been implicated in canine 
and feline UTI, it is difficult to determine cause-and-effect 
relationships because viral-induced disease may occur in 
the absence of detectable replicating virus.
3 Clinical signs
Generally, clinical signs of upper and lower urinary tract 
infections are indistinguishable. They may be symptomatic 
or asymptomatic as most of the owners do not observe the 
color, flow, and odor of the urine unless the dog shows dis-
comfort while micturition. Pollakiuria, dysuria, stranguria, 
hematuria, cloudy urine, pus-mixed urine, and inappropriate 
urination are the commonly seen signs but are nonspecific 
to the lower or upper urinary tract. Caudal abdominal pain, 
stiff gait, discomfort while urinating, preputial discharge, 
and unwillingness to breed are clinical signs seen in dogs 
with UTI-associated prostatitis.
Pyelonephritis may have an acute or chronic presenta -
tion. Uremia, fever, painful kidneys, possible nephromeg -
aly, hematuria (bacterial origin), and/or sepsis are seen in 
acute cases, whereas in chronic pyelonephritis slowly pro -
gressive azotemia that may not be associated with uremia, 
progressive kidney damage, and ultimately, renal failure is 
seen if untreated.
4 Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on the presence of clinical signs like he-
maturia, pyuria, stranguria or dysuria, etc. Urinalysis (dip -
stick or through urine analyzer) to measure the urine pH, 
specific gravity, the presence of proteins, blood, ketones, 
glucose, bile salts and pigments and cytological exami -
nation of the sediment should be performed in cases sus -
pected of urinary tract infections. Bacteriological culture 
often confirms bacterial cystitis or urinary tract infections. 
Specimens for culture should be collected by cystocente -
sis unless there is a contraindication. Ultrasound guidance 
facilitates the collection of samples by cystocentesis and 
also provides an opportunity to assess the bladder for ab -
normalities such as uroliths or masses. Culture of voided 
samples or urine collected through in-placed catheters may 
show both false-positive and false-negative cultures and is 
considered when cystocentesis is unable to perform. The 
voided samples should be cultured within a few hours. If 
samples cannot be processed immediately, they should be 
refrigerated and processed for culture within 24  h of col -
lection (Patterson et al., 2016 ). Recurrent UTIs need to be 
looked in for the underlying cause. In cats, diagnosis of bac-
terial cystitis should be confirmed by aerobic bacterial urine 
culture in all cases due to the low likelihood of bacterial 
cystitis in cats with lower urinary tract infections.
Azotemia, cylindruria, and peripheral neutrophilia are 
the laboratory findings in cases with pyelonephritis. Imaging 
findings show renal pelvic dilation and/or blunting of the re-
nal papilla on ultrasound examination but are nonspecific to 
UTI. Ultrasonographic evaluation of the prostate is recom -
mended to characterize the size and structure of the prostate 
in case of UTI associated with prostatitis. Radiographically 
a pelvically displaced urinary bladder is noticed in prosta -
titis and renal pelvic dilation in pyelonephritis. Care should 
be taken not to overinterpret the relevance of renal pelvic 
dilation, since it can be present in normal animals and those 
with other renal diseases (D’Anjou et al., 2011).
Evaluation for leptospirosis should be considered in 
culture-negative dogs. Further, fungal culture and isolation 
for fungal UTIs and virus isolation is the gold standard for 
the diagnosis of viral UTIs, but it is expensive and time-
consuming and requires live replicating virus. Diagnostic 
polymerase chain reaction assays are rapid and sensitive, 
but methods to optimize nucleic acid preparation are essen-
tial because the nucleic acids are easily degraded in urine.

Urinary system diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 10  149
5 Treatment
The treatment of urinary tract infections is often based on 
bacterial culture and isolation, but empirical therapy in 
lieu of culture is justified in dogs with suspected cystitis, 
particularly in animals with limited previous antimicrobial 
exposure and in situations where the likely pathogens and 
susceptibility patterns/signs are predictable. Antimicrobial 
drugs are the mainstay for the treatment of UTI, the cho -
sen antimicrobial should be based on susceptibility testing 
of the uropathogen, as overuse and misuse may result in 
the emergence of resistant organisms and/or superinfection. 
Antimicrobial therapy should be initiated while waiting for 
the culture and sensitivity results. Empirical antimicrobi -
als that have efficacy against gram-negative bacteria, the 
most common pathogens should be chosen. The choice of 
antimicrobial for urinary tract infections in dogs and cats 
is presented in Table 1. UTIs are successfully treated with 
a 10–14-day course of an appropriate antimicrobial agent. 
The clinical signs should resolve in 48 h if the correct antibi-
otic with the proper dosage and frequency is used. However, 
urine culture should be performed 5–7 days after cessation 
of antibiotic therapy.
For fungal UTIs, fluconazole is recommended as an ini-
tial treatment because of sensitivity, high margin of safety, 
and excretion of active drugs in high concentrations in urine. 
Although amphotericin B is renally excreted and achieves 
high concentration in urine, it is not often used because of 
its nephrotoxicity nature. Other commonly used antifungal 
drugs, including itraconazole and ketoconazole, are not ex-
creted in active form in urine (Shelly and Joseph, 2015).
Antiviral drugs have not been evaluated for animals with 
viral-induced urinary tract disease, and the management of 
these patients is limited to supportive care.
Ancillary therapy includes the usage of d-mannose, 
methanamine, and cranberry which is used to prevent re -
current UTI, but there are no studies of clinical efficacy in 
veterinary patients. Local infusions with antimicrobials, 
antiseptics, and dimethyl sulfoxide can be irritating and 
are not retained within the urinary bladder. Anecdotally, 
the instillation of dilute chlorhexidine (1:100, 0.02%) and/
or ethylenediaminetetraacetic acid (EDTA)-tromethamine 
(EDTA-Tris) via cystotomy tube may decrease the inci -
dence of bacterial UTI. Farca et  al. (1997)  reported that 
daily local infusion of 25  mL EDTA at 37°C via a sterile 
urinary catheter in dogs for 7 days showed negative urine 
cultures up to 180 days after treatment and was well toler -
ated by the dogs. However, additional studies are needed 
to determine the short- and long-term effects of EDTA-Tris 
therapy.
Urinary acidifiers or alkalizers to change pH (normal pH 
of urine in dogs: 7.0–7.5 in dogs and 6.3–6.6 in cats); as 
altered pH reduces microbial population is supplemented 
with the specific antimicrobial treatment. If the urine pH 
remains below the normal values after diet modification, 
potassium citrate at 80–150  mg/kg/day, PO, divided bid-
tid, can be given to increase the pH. Ammonium chlo -
ride (200  mg/kg/day, PO, divided tid) and dl-methionine 
(1000–1500 mg/cat/day, PO) are the urinary acidifiers of 
choice. Chronic urine acidification, and ensuing acidosis, 
can be harmful and should not be instituted without a com-
plete evaluation of the animal. The use of diuretics, viz., 
furosemide @ 1–2 mg/kg body weight to restore urine flow 
except in urinary obstruction and antacids, viz., ranitidine 
@ 0.5–2 mg/kg body weight IV; pantoprazole @ 0.7–1 mg/
kg body weight IV in case of gastritis due to uremia are 
beneficial.
6 Urolithiasis
Urolithiasis is the most common cause of urinary tract ob -
structions in both dogs and cats, though ureteroliths are con-
sidered to be more prevalent. Greater than 98% of feline and 
over 50% of canine ureteroliths were composed of calcium 
oxalate (Berent, 2011). Urolithiasis or Calculi are solid col-
lections of urinary components that have formed crystals, 
precipitated out of the urine, and formed into stones. Thus, 
formed stones/calculi obstruct the urinary tract resulting in 
anuria, stranguria, dysuria, hematuria, and sometimes cys -
titis. The calculi are formed when the urine becomes super 
saturated with dissolved salts and these salts precipitate to 
form crystals, which may not get excreted and they aggre -
gate into solid concentration forming calculi.
Factors responsible for the formation of calculi include 
bacterial infections, supersaturation, genetics, loss of crys -
tallization inhibition, urine pH and concentration, idio -
pathic hypercalcemia (more common in cats) and oxalates, 
and frequent history of acidifying diet. Calculi that lodge 
in the bladder are termed cystic calculi ( Fig. 1), and in the 
urethra, it is urethral calculi ( Fig. 2), the latter being most 
common in dogs and cats. The various compositions, i.e., 
oxalate, struvite, urate, uric acid, cystine, and silicate aggre-
gate form calculi, and the treatment approach depends on 
the composition/type of calculi ( Table 2). They may occur 
as single large calculi or multiple causing partial or com -
plete obstruction of the urinary tract.
6.1 Clinical signs and diagnosis
The clinical signs often mimic the signs of urinary tract in -
fections and renal failure. Pollakiuria, dysuria, hematuria, 
stranguria, dripping blood -tinged urine from the prepuce, 
distended abdomen, kyphosis, and pain on palpation of the 
caudal abdomen may be seen in dogs and cats with uroliths. 
In cats, the signs often go unnoticed and may be presented 
with severe azotemia.
Physical examination plays a crucial role in the diagno-
sis of urinary tract obstruction in dogs and cats. In ureteral

TABLE 1 Antimicrobial recommendations for the management of bacterial urinary tract infection in dogs and cats.
Druga (WHO category) Dose Comments
Amikacin (CIA) Dogs: 15–30 mg/kg IV/IM/SC every 24 h
Cats: 10–14 mg/kg IV/IM/SC every 24 h
Not recommended for routine use but may be useful for the treatment of multidrug-resistant organisms. 
Potentially nephrotoxic. Avoid animals with reduced kidney function. Other factors (e.g., low pH) can affect 
aminoglycoside activity, which should be considered. Care should be taken when using it in combination 
with nephroactive drugs (e.g., NSAIDs)
Amoxicillin (CIA) 11–15 mg/kg PO every 8–12 h Good first-line option for sporadic bacterial cystitis. Excreted in urine predominantly in the active form 
if normal kidney function is present. Klebsiella spp. are resistant. Ampicillin is used in susceptibility tests 
to predict the activity of amoxicillin. The breakpoint for susceptibility testing is ≤0.25 μg/mL for systemic 
infections, but a breakpoint of ≤8 μg/mL can be used for lower urinary tract infections owing to high urine 
concentrations. Not recommended for pyelonephritis or prostatitis
Amoxicillin/clavulanate 
(CIA)
12.5–25 mg/kg PO every 12 h
Note: dose of total product (amoxicillin+ 
clavulanic acid)
Not established whether there is any advantage over amoxicillin alone for sporadic bacterial cystitis. 
The reasonable empiric choice for cystitis when regional susceptibility data support a high prevalence of 
resistance to amoxicillin but susceptibility to amoxicillin/clavulanic acid
Not recommended for pyelonephritis or prostatitis. The breakpoint for susceptibility testing is ≤0.25 μg/mL for 
systemic infections, but a breakpoint of ≤8 μg/mL can be used for lower urinary tract infections owing to high 
urine concentrations
Ampicillin (CIA) – Not recommended because of poor oral bioavailability. Amoxicillin is preferred. Ampicillin is used in 
susceptibility tests to predict the activity of amoxicillin
Cefazolin (HIA) 22 mg/kg IV ∼30 min prior to the procedure The main use is for periprocedure prophylaxis as a single preprocedure dose. Cefazolin, at a breakpoint of 
≤16 μg/mL, can also be used to predict the activity of oral cephalosporins
Cefovecin (HP-CIA) 8 mg/kg single SC injection. Can be repeated 
once after 7–14 days
Duration and spectrum are longer than is typically needed, so not recommended for routine use. Should only 
be used in situations where oral treatment is not possible. Enterococcus spp. are resistant. Pharmacokinetic 
data are available to support a duration of 14 days in dogs and 21 days in cats
Cefpodoxime proxetil  
(HP-CIA)
Dogs: 5–10 mg/kg every 24 h PO
Cats: no dose established
More active than cephalexin or cefadroxil against Enterobacteriaceae when using the breakpoint of 2 μg/mL 
for interpretation. Enterococcus spp. are resistant
Ceftiofur (HP-CIA) Dogs: 2 mg/kg every 12–24 h SC
Cats: no dose established
Approved for the treatment of bacterial cystitis in dogs in some regions. Enterococcus spp. are resistant
Cefuroxime (HIA) Perioperative prophylaxis: 20–50 mg/kg slow IV Second-generation cephalosporin that can be used perioperatively. Enterococcus spp. are resistant
Cephalexin, cefadroxil 
(HIA)
12–25 mg/kg PO every 12 h Narrow-spectrum activity; not active against Enterobacteriaceae when using the current breakpoint of 2 μg/mL 
but CLSI has recently revised the breakpoint to <16 μg/mL, consistent with human medicine. Enterococcus 
spp. are resistant
Chloramphenicol (HIA) Dogs: 40–50 mg/kg PO every 8 h
Cats: 12.5–20 mg/kg (to a maximum of 50 mg/
cat) PO every 12 h
Reserved for multidrug-resistant infections with few other options. Myelosuppression can occur, particularly 
in cats, and with long-term (e.g., >28 days) therapy. Avoid contact with humans because of rare idiosyncratic 
aplastic anemia. Not a first-line treatment for pyelonephritis or prostatitis
Ciprofloxacin (HP-CIA) 25–30 mg/kg PO every 24 h Sometimes used because of lower cost than veterinary fluoroquinolones. Lower and more variable oral 
bioavailability than approved veterinary fluoroquinolones. Difficult to justify over-approved fluoroquinolones. 
Dosing recommendations are empirical and based on limited pharmacokinetic studies
No interpretive criteria are available for testing isolates from animals as CLSI recommends that human 
breakpoints not be used for testing canine isolates. Not recommended for prostatitis

Doxycycline (HIA) 5 mg/kg PO every 12 h Not excreted in urine at high levels but can achieve levels that are effective against some pathogens. Reserved 
for infections caused by pathogens that are resistant to drugs that are actively excreted in the urine in active 
form. Care should be taken with administration recommendations in cats to reduce the risk of esophageal 
ulceration
Enrofloxacin (HP-CIA) 5 mg/kg PO every 24 h (cats)
5–20 mg/kg every 24 h (dogs)
Excreted in urine predominantly in active form. Reserve for documented resistant infections but initial/
empirical choice for pyelonephritis and prostatitis in dogs at the higher end of the dosing range. Not 
recommended for Enterococcus spp. Associated with risk of retinopathy in cats. It is recommended to avoid 
enrofloxacin in cats. If it must be used, a dose of 5 mg/kg/day should not be exceeded
Fosfomycin (CIA) 40 mg/kg PO (with food) every 12 h Should be reserved for multidrug-resistant infections. Do not use it in cats. Potential option for pyelonephritis 
and prostatitis dosed every 8 h
Imipenem-cilastatin (CIA) 5 mg/kg IV/IM every 6–8 h Reserve for treatment of multidrug-resistant infections, particularly those caused by ESBL-producing 
Enterobacteriaceae or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Enterococcus faecium is inherently resistant. Recommend 
consultation with a urinary or infectious disease veterinary specialist or veterinary pharmacologist prior to use
Levofloxacin (HP-CIA) 25 mg/kg PO every 24 h (dogs) Sometimes used as a lower-cost fluoroquinolone. Licensed fluoroquinolones should be used when possible. 
High oral bioavailability in dogs
Marbofloxacin (HP-CIA) 2.7–5.5 mg/kg PO every 24 h Excreted in urine predominantly in active form. Reserve for documented resistant infections but a good 
first-line choice for pyelonephritis. Considered first-line choice for infections that involve the prostate. Not 
recommended for Enterococcus spp.
Meropenem (CIA) Dogs: 8.5 mg/kg SC/IV every 12 h (SC) or every 
8 h (IV)
Cats: 10 mg/kg every 12 h IV, SC, IM
Reserve for treatment of multidrug-resistant infections, particularly those caused by ESBL-producing 
Enterobacteriaceae or Pseudomonas aeruginosa. Enterococcus faecium is inherently resistant. Recommend 
consultation with a urinary or infectious disease veterinary specialist or veterinary pharmacologist prior to use
Nitrofurantoin (IA) 4.4–5 mg/kg PO every 8 h Option for sporadic bacterial cystitis, particularly when multidrug-resistant pathogens are involved. Must not 
be used for pyelonephritis or other infections where tissue (vs urine) drug levels are needed
Orbifloxacin (HP-CIA) Tablets: 2.5–7.5 mg/kg PO every 24 h
Suspension (cats): 7.5 mg/kg every 24 h
Excreted in urine predominantly in active form. Reserve for documented resistant infections but a good 
first-line choice for pyelonephritis. Considered a first-line choice for infections that involve the prostate. Not 
recommended for Enterococcus spp.
Pradofloxacin (HP-CIA) Dogs: 3–5 mg/kg PO every 24 h
Cats: 3–5 mg/kg once daily (tablets) or 
5–7.5 mg/kg every 24 h (suspension)
Evidence is published regarding the efficacy of treating bacterial cystitis in dogs and cats
Greater activity against some bacteria than older fluoroquinolones (enrofloxacin, marbofloxacin, 
orbifloxacin). Theoretically a good first-line choice for pyelonephritis, especially in cats. Not recommended 
for Enterococcus spp.
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine/
trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole/
ormetoprim-
sulfadimethoxine (HIA)
15–30 mg/kg PO every 12 h
Note: dose of total product 
(trimethoprim + sulfadiazine)
Appropriate initial or empirical option. Concerns regarding idiosyncratic and immune-mediated adverse 
effects in some patients; however, this is most relevant with long-term therapy. If prolonged (>7 days) therapy 
is anticipated, baseline Schirmer’s tear testing is recommended, with periodic re-evaluation and owner 
monitoring for ocular discharge. Avoid dogs that may be sensitive to potential adverse effects such as KCS, 
hepatopathy, hypersensitivity, and skin eruptions. Activity against Enterococcus spp. in urine is controversial 
and should be avoided. Can be considered a treatment choice for prostate infections
CIA, critically important antimicrobial; CLSI, Clinical Laboratory Standards Institute; ESBL, extended spectrum β-lactamase; HIA, highly important antimicrobial; HP-CIA, highest priority critically important antimicrobial;  
IA, important antimicrobial; KCS, keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
a Drug category per World Health Organization guidelines.
Adapted from Weese, S.J., Blondeau, J., Boothe, D., et al., 2019. International Society for Companion Animal Infectious Diseases (ISCAID) guidelines for the diagnosis and management of bacterial urinary tract infections in 
dogs and cats. Vet. J. 247, 8–25.

152 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
obstruction, on palpation the obstructed kidney is small and 
the other kidney is firm and enlarged, whereas in kidney 
diseases (acute or chronic) the kidneys are symmetrical. 
Therefore, asymmetrical kidneys upon abdominal palpation 
are suggestive of an obstructive disease (Shipov and Segev, 
2013). Common laboratory abnormalities in dogs are leu -
kocytosis and azotemia (56%), whereas in cats anemia (he-
maturia), azotemia, and hyperkalemia are commonly found. 
Urinalysis provides information like the presence of blood 
and pus, pH, specific gravity, casts, and crystals in urine. 
However, crystals in urine are a frequent finding and it is 
not always associated with the disease. Urine crystals other 
than struvite and calcium oxalate dihydride are highly in -
dicative of underlying disease. Struvite occurs chiefly in 
basic urine. Cystine crystals predispose to uroliths due to 
its low solubility in acidic urine. Calcium oxalate monohy-
drate crystals create suspicion of ethylene glycol toxicity. 
Ammonium biurate or uric acid crystals are suggestive of 
underlying liver disease but can be normal in Dalmatians 
and English Bulldogs ( Yadav et  al., 2020). Urinary casts 
(Hyaline, Cellular) are cylindrical molds formed by the lu -
mens of the renal tubules. In urine from a healthy animal <2 
hyaline casts per low-power film and more than one granu-
lar cast per low film are observed.
Radiopaque calculi are typically visible in patients with 
calculi (Fig. 1). The radiopacity of the calculi varies from 
the composition of the crystal (as depicted below).
FIG. 1 Lateral abdomen radiograph showing cystoliths.
FIG. 2 Calculi at the urethral orifice in a male dog.
TABLE 2 Types of uroliths in dogs and cats.
Composition of 
calculi
Breed 
predisposed Comment
Struvite/
magnesium 
ammonium 
phosphate
Miniature 
Schnauzers, 
Bichon Frises, and 
Cocker Spaniel
Neutral to 
alkaline pH of the 
urine
Bacterial 
infections 
increase the pH of 
the urine through 
the urease 
enzyme in dogs
Calcium oxalate Miniature 
Schnauzers, Lhasa 
Apsos, Yorkshire 
Terriers, Miniature 
Poodles, Shih Tzus, 
and Bichon Frises
Most common
Acidic to neutral 
urine
Two types: 
calcium oxalate 
monohydrate, or 
whewellite and 
calcium oxalate 
dihydrate, or 
weddellite
Urate/ammonium 
urate/sodium urate 
monohydrate
Dalmatians and 
Bulldogs
Acidic to neutral 
urine
Increased 
excretion of uric 
acid in the urine
Cystine Bulldogs, 
Dachshunds, 
Basset Hounds, 
Chihuahuas, 
Yorkshire Terriers, 
Irish Terriers, and 
Newfoundlands
Acidic to neutral 
urine
Increased urine 
excretion of 
cystine
Calcium phosphate Yorkshire Terriers, 
Miniature 
Schnauzers, and 
Cocker Spaniels
Neutral to 
alkaline urine
Usually occur as 
mixed calculi
Silicate German Shepherd 
Dogs, Golden 
Retrievers, 
Labrador 
Retrievers, 
and Miniature 
Schnauzers
Acidic to neutral 
urine

Urinary system diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 10  153
Most radiopaque
Calcium phosphate
Calcium oxalate
Silicate
Struvite*
Cystine
Urate
Most radiolucent
The combination of radiographs and ultrasound is pre -
ferred in the diagnosis of urinary tract obstructions. The 
benefit of the radiographs and ultrasound is to document 
stone size, number, location, and the presence of concur -
rent nephrolithiasis, but the shape and radio density of the 
calculi are often underestimated with ultrasound. Contrast 
studies, computerized tomography, and antegrade pyelogra-
phy are a few advanced and detailed diagnostic procedures 
to rule out the uroliths when radiograph and ultrasound fail 
to document them.
6.2 Treatment and management of uroliths
The primary objective in urinary tract obstruction due to cal-
culi is to relieve the urine from the urinary tract to prevent 
toxemia, azotemia, and rupture of the bladder. The obstruc-
tion is relieved either by introducing the urinary catheter or 
by pushing the obstructed calculi into the bladder if pos -
sible. If not, hydropropulsion may be followed with nor -
mal saline. Decompression by cystocentesis and emergency 
urethrotomy are the other choices if the catheter is unable to 
pass into the bladder due to calculi obstruction. Correction 
of fluids and electrolytes should be done. Urocystoliths 
that are small enough to pass through the urethra should be 
removed by medical dissolution, voiding urohydropropul -
sion, basket retrieval, or other extraction procedures that do 
not involve surgical intervention.
Medical dissolution of uroliths is a typically successful 
approach to struvite urolithiasis in dogs and cats and is the 
recommended approach ( Lulich et al., 2016 ). In dogs, un -
like cats, almost all struvite calculi are infection-induced, 
usually by Staphylococcus pseudintermedius or, less com -
monly, by Proteus mirabilis. These bacteria have the abil -
ity to hydrolyze urea to form ammonia and carbon dioxide. 
This reaction increases the urine pH and makes ammonium 
available to form magnesium ammonium phosphate crys -
tals. Potential reasons for ongoing antimicrobial therapy 
during the dissolution period include the possibility that 
 viable bacteria are released from within the urolith as it dis-
solves and because physical trauma to the bladder wall from 
the urolith could predispose to the re-establishment of in -
fection. Medical dissolution, ureteral stents, intracorporeal 
laser lithotripsy, or percutaneous cystolithotomy instead of 
cystotomy is minimally invasive procedures and are associ-
ated with shorter hospitalization, perceived fewer adverse 
effects, fewer residual stones because of improved visual -
ization, and possibly lower stone recurrence rates ( Lulich 
et al., 2016).
If medical dissolution fails, other options such as ex -
tracorporeal shock wave lithotripsy and subcutaneous ure -
teral bypass device placement, or traditional surgery, can 
be considered. Electrohydraulic shock wave lithotripsy is 
a procedure where the calculi are broken down into small 
pieces or powdered form when a shock wave is generated 
in close proximity to calculi in the bladder under cysto -
scopic visualization; whereas extracorporeal shock-wave 
lithotripsy (ESWL) is another minimally invasive alter -
native for the removal of ureteral calculi. ESWL delivers 
external shockwaves through a water medium directed 
under fluoroscopic guidance in two planes. The stone is 
shocked anywhere from 1000 to 3500 times at different 
energy levels to allow for implosion and powdering. The 
debris is then left to pass down the ureter into the urinary 
bladder over a 1–2-week period. This procedure can be 
performed safely for ureteroliths smaller than 5  mm in 
dogs and 3–5  mm in cats. For larger stones, an indwell -
ing double-pigtailed ureteral stent is placed before ESWL 
to aid in stone debris passage, ureteral imaging, and im -
mediate relief of the ureteral obstruction. For stones of 
larger sizes or those imbedded in the ureteral mucosa, 
other minimally invasive options like a PCNL (percuta -
neous nephrolithotomy) may be necessary ( Farca et  al., 
1997). PCNL is a minimally invasive procedure where an 
antegrade nephron-ureteroscopy is performed via renal ac -
cess. This is rarely necessary in veterinary medicine. The 
current recommended treatment is ESWL for dogs with 
ureteral obstructions (with or without a concurrent ureteral 
stent) and a ureteral stent in cats if they have concurrent 
nephroliths, multiple ureteroliths, and are considered a 
poor surgical candidate or have a history of previous cal -
culi surgery.
Removal or bypass of uroliths will not alter the underly-
ing conditions responsible for their formation. Therefore, 
it is logical to assume that additional therapeutic strategies 
are needed to prevent urolith recurrence. The most effective 
prevention strategies are those that eliminate the underlying 
cause. Nutrition plays a major role and is of interest, but 
debatable in the management of urolithiasis because of epi-
demiological and pathophysiological data associating nutri-
ent intake with urine saturation and potential lithogenicity. 
Feeding diets high in moisture is one of the cornerstones of 
urolith prevention strategies (Table 3).

154 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
7 Urinary tract tumors
The urinary tract tumor constituents <1% in dogs. Among 
the various tumors affecting the urinary tract, transitional 
cell carcinoma (TCC) accounts for 50%–75% and the etiol-
ogy is not completely understood often likely to be mul -
tifactorial. The tumor prevalence is higher in females and 
older dogs. Clinical signs of TCC are dysuria including he-
maturia, stranguria, and pollakiuria. Weight loss, lethargy, 
and lameness may also be noticed. Advanced cases may 
present with signs of bladder rupture, such as a distended 
and painful abdomen. Tumors are most commonly found in 
the trigone region of the urinary bladder.
Tumor antigen screening tests for TCC have been devel-
oped, but have low sensitivity and specificity. Other methods 
of detection of TCC include radiography (double-contrast 
cystography) and ultrasound examination. Definitive diag -
nosis can be achieved through histopathologic examination 
of a tissue sample obtained by a cystotomy, cystoscopy, or 
a catheter biopsy. Death is most commonly due to urinary 
tract obstruction when the primary tumor is not treated; this 
generally occurs prior to metastasis. Due to the progressive 
nature of this disease, most treatment is palliative. Surgical 
excision of most tumors is difficult due to their location and 
proximity to the ureters. Other treatment options include 
chemotherapy, with the most success achieved by using 
combination protocols. One study reported median survival 
times of 259 d in 11 dogs with the use of doxorubicin along 
with cyclophosphamide. Nonsteroidal antiinflammatory 
drug (NSAID) therapy with piroxicam is gaining increas -
ing consideration, as it is thought to cause TCC remission 
by induction of apoptosis. The survival rate was increased 
in dogs with TCC with the use of piroxicam. Piroxicam is 
also commonly combined with chemotherapeutic agents, 
such as mitoxantrone, which induces remission more fre -
quently when used in conjunction rather than either drug on 
its own. Carbon dioxide laser ablation has also been used 
in combination with mitoxantrone and piroxicam treatment 
(Caswell, 2011).
8 Chronic kidney disease
Chronic kidney disease (CKD) is the most common con -
dition seen in all age groups of dogs and cats, but higher 
incidences are seen among geriatric animals. CKD can be 
defined as an irreversible progressive disease of the kidney 
characterized by the presence of structural or functional ab-
normalities of one or both kidneys that have been present 
for an extended period, usually last for 3 months or more. 
CKD patients may accompany a wide range of clinical and 
clinicopathological changes, ranging from a minor struc -
tural lesion in a single kidney to extensive loss of nephrons 
affecting both kidneys (Polzin, 2011).
Based on serum creatinine concentration values, the 
International Renal Interest Society ( IRIS, 2017 ) classi -
fied CKD in dogs and cats into four stages (Stages I–IV) 
(Table 4). CKD dogs are further categorized into different 
subgroups based on the presence or absence of proteinuria 
(Table 5) and systemic hypertension (Table 6).
TABLE 3 Nutritional management strategy of urolith.
Type of calculi Nutritional management strategy
Sterile struvite urolith Foods with low magnesium and 
phosphorus that acidify urine
Calcium oxalate 
urolith
Avoid urine acidification and avoid 
diets with excessive protein content
Consider potassium citrate or other 
alkalinizing citrate salts for dogs and 
cats with persistent acidic urine
Consider thiazide diuretics for 
frequently recurrent calcium oxalate 
uroliths
Urate urolith Promote alkaline urine and limit 
purine intake
Consider xanthine oxidase inhibitors 
for dogs homozygous for genetic 
hyperuricosuria that have failed 
therapeutic diet prevention
Cystine urolith Limit animal protein intake, limit 
sodium intake, increase urine pH, 
and neuter
Add 2-mercaptopropionylglycine 
(tiopronin, thiola) to previously 
recommended prevention strategies 
to further lower cystine concentration 
and increase cystine solubility
Source: Lulich, J.P., Berent, A.C., Adams, L.G., Westropp, J.L., 
Bartges, J.W., Osborne, C.A., 2016. ACVIM small animal consensus 
recommendations on the treatment and prevention of uroliths in dogs and 
cats. J. Vet. Intern. Med. 30, 1564–1574.
TABLE 4 Stages of CKD based on creatinine 
concentration (mg/dL) in dogs and cats (IRIS, 2017).
Serum creatinine 
concentration (mg/dL)
Stage of CKD Dogs Cats Comments
Stage I <1.4 <1.6 Non-azotemic
Stage II 1.4–2.0 1.6–2.8 Non-azotemic 
to mild renal 
azotemia
Stage III 2.1–5.0 2.9–5.0 Moderate renal 
azotemia
Stage IV >5.0 >5.0 Severe renal 
azotemia

Urinary system diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 10  155
The exact etiology of CKD is still obscure. Various un -
derlying factors identified in CKD dogs and cats are toxic 
insults, hypoxia, chronic glomerulonephritis, chronic py -
elonephritis, upper urinary tract obstructions, recurrent 
tick-induced fevers, and certain viruses like retroviruses, 
morbillivirus, etc. (Reynolds and Lefebvre, 2013). Specific 
conditions like amyloidosis, polycystic kidney disease, re -
nal lymphoma, hypercalcemic nephropathy, and congenital 
disorders can directly damage the kidney ( Reynolds and 
Lefebvre, 2013; DiBartola et al., 1987).
8.1 Clinical signs
Clinical signs are subtle in the early stages of the disease, 
but as the disease progresses patients may show signs of 
inappetence, polyuria, polydipsia, emesis, weight loss, leth-
argy, halitosis, oral ulcerative lesions (Fig. 3), melena, etc. 
Physical examination may reveal loss of body condition 
(Fig. 4), variable levels of dehydration, pale mucous mem -
branes (Fig. 5), hypertension, etc.
8.2 Diagnosis
Diagnostic approach to confirm CKD consists of history 
taking, physical examination including assessment of body 
condition score, measurement of blood pressure, hematol -
ogy, serum biochemistry, urinalysis, imaging diagnostic 
techniques (radiography, ultrasonography, computed to -
mography, etc.), and renal biopsy.
A detailed history should be obtained from the pet own-
ers related to the animal to avoid confusion and misdiag -
nosis with similar health conditions. Case history should 
consist of onset of initial symptoms, duration of illness, any 
previous illness, vaccination, deworming, body weight sta-
tus, frequency of vomiting, diarrhea, color of stools, poly -
uria, polydipsia, halitosis, loss of appetite, weakness, etc.
Clinical examination should be focused on signs of 
weight loss, oral examination to identify ulcerative lesions, 
TABLE 5 IRIS substaging of CKD based on urine protein 
and creatinine ratio (UPC).
UPC ratio Dogs Cats
Nonproteinuric <0.2 <0.2
Boarder line proteinuric 0.2–0.5 0.2–0.4
Proteinuric >0.5 >0.4
TABLE 6 IRIS substaging of CKD based on systemic 
blood pressure in dogs and cats.
Classification
Systolic blood 
pressure (mmHg)
Diastolic 
blood pressure 
(mmHg)
Normotensive <150 <95
Borderline 
hypertensive
150–159 95–99
Hypertensive 160–180 100–120
Severe 
hypertensive
>180 >120
FIG. 3 Ulcerative lesion in the oral cavity.
FIG. 4 CKD dog with chronic wasting (loss of body).

156 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
gingivitis and halitosis, color, and nature of mucous mem -
branes. Skin tenting time and capillary refill time denotes 
the level of dehydration and anemia respectively. Blood and 
urine samples should be collected for routine hematology, 
serum biochemistry, and urinalysis.
Urine samples have to be collected by using appropriate-
sized urinary catheters in both male and female dogs, tom 
urinary catheters can be employed in male cats. Analysis 
of urine samples is done either by dipsticks or analyzers to 
evaluate urine specific gravity (USG), urine pH, urine sedi-
ment analysis, urine protein and creatinine ratio (UPCR), 
and other abnormal constituents. A urine culture is advis -
able in cases suspected of recurrent urinary infections or 
pyelonephritis.
Urinalysis results may vary in early kidney disease 
and progressive loss of concentrating ability occurs as the 
 disease progresses to a later stage of the disease. Inadequate 
concentrating ability is defined for cats as urine with a spe-
cific gravity of less than 1.035 and for dogs less than 1.030. 
Renal proteinuria can be glomerular and or tubular in origin 
due to excessive filtration, decreased tubular reabsorption, 
or both. Urine protein and creatinine ratios (UPCR)  > 2 
suggest glomerular range proteinuria, which is rare in cats 
compared with dogs. It is important to recognize that the 
UPCR does not differentiate renal proteinuria from pro -
teinuria associated with lower urinary tract inflammation; 
hence, the clinician has to confirm by assessing the patient 
and urine sediment.
Routine serum biochemical tests include total proteins 
(albumin and globulin), urea, creatinine, electrolytes (so -
dium, potassium, chloride, calcium, and phosphorous), and 
other analytes (e.g., thyroxine in an older cat) that help to 
identify the severity of the disease. Routine hematology 
helps to assess the severity of anemia, extent and type of 
inflammation, etc.
Hypertension is a common phenomenon in CKD patients, 
hence monitoring of blood pressure is essential at regular in-
tervals. Systolic blood pressure is typically measured by the 
Doppler or oscillometric methods in dogs and cats. Ultrasonic 
Doppler flow detector method is commonly used for estimat-
ing blood pressure in dogs and cats, which estimates arterial 
pressure (brachial artery, dorsal pedal artery, and saphenous 
artery) by detecting changes induced by blood flow during 
external compression by an inflatable cuff (Fig. 6).
8.2.1 Ultrasonographic examination  
of kidneys
Abdominal ultrasonography is an ideal noninvasive diag -
nostic modality to identify any structural abnormalities in 
FIG. 5 Pale mucus membranes in a CKD dog.
FIG. 6 Recording blood pressure in a dog with Doppler ultrasonographic technique.

Urinary system diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 10  157
kidneys and associated structures. A 5–8 MHz transducer is 
adequate for most dogs and an 8–15 MHz transducer is op-
timal for cats. The abdomen is prepared by clipping the hair 
and applying acoustic coupling gel to the skin. The kidneys 
are initially examined from the ventral abdomen with the 
animal in dorsal recumbency.
Ultrasonographic examination of the kidneys must be 
performed thoroughly to identify the size, shape, architec -
ture, and abnormal lesions in the renal parenchyma. The 
kidneys should have a smooth contour with a thin echo -
genic capsule. The sonographic appearance of the kidneys 
depends on the image plane and the particular location of 
the slice of the ultrasound beam.
Overall increased renal echogenicity and reduced cor -
ticomedullary definition have been described with con -
genital renal dysplasia, juvenile nephropathy, chronic 
inflammatory diseases, and end-stage kidney disease from 
a variety of causes in dogs and cats ( Lobetti et al., 1996 ; 
Felkai et al., 1997 ; Miyamoto et al., 1997 ; Walter et al., 
1987). In end-stage renal disease, kidneys are typically 
small, irregular, and diffusely echogenic with poor visu -
alization of the corticomedullary junction and internal re -
nal architecture ( Fig.  7). Reduced cortical echogenicity, 
multifocal hypoechoic areas, hypoechoic nodules, or hy -
poechoic masses may be seen with lymphosarcoma of 
the kidneys in the dog and cat. As focal or diffuse paren -
chymal lesions of the kidney have a variety of ultrasono -
graphic appearances, aspiration or biopsy of the kidney is 
recommended for diagnosis.
8.2.2 Abdominal radiographs
Radiographic examination of kidneys helps to locate the 
changes/alterations in the size and shape of the kidneys, 
but radiographic findings alone are insufficient to confirm 
the disease. Particularly, diffuse infiltrative renal diseases 
(inflammatory, metabolic, or neoplastic) resembles simi -
lar imaging features, the radiographic findings should be 
amalgamated with the observations of additional diagnostic 
techniques like imaging ultrasonography, computed tomog-
raphy, renal fine-needle aspiration cytology or biopsy to 
make a definitive diagnosis.
Focal or diffuse lesions in the renal parenchyma enhance 
the renal radio-opacity. Possible causes for radio-opaque le-
sions include renal calculi ( Fig.  8) or mineralization and 
dystrophic mineralization of renal parenchymal lesions 
such as cysts or neoplasms. A generalized increase in renal 
radiographic opacity is an uncommon finding and may be 
associated with diffuse mineralization of the renal paren -
chyma (nephrocalcinosis).
Patients with chronic renal disease commonly have 
small and irregular contours of kidneys. Renal mineraliza -
tion or nephrolithiasis may occur as a concurrent infection 
which can be diagnosed by urography. Expected findings 
include decreased contrast medium accumulation within the 
renal parenchyma, and poor opacification of the renal pel -
vis and ureter due to decreased renal function ( Hecht and 
Henry, 2020).
8.2.3 Renal biopsy
Kidney biopsy is an invasive diagnostic technique that in -
volves the collection of tissue material from the kidney in -
tended for histopathological or cytological examinations. 
Kidney biopsy is warranted in animals suspected of protein-
losing nephropathies, acute or chronic renal insufficiency, 
and renal tumors. Biopsy techniques used to collect tissue 
samples from the kidney include blind biopsy, radiological-
guided biopsy, keyhole biopsy, ultrasound-guided biopsy, 
FIG. 7 Left kidney showing loss of internal architecture in a CKD dog.
 FIG. 8 Ventrodorsal radiographic image with bilateral nephroliths.

158 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
laparoscopic-guided biopsy, and biopsy through laparot -
omy. Choice of the kidney biopsy technique depends on the 
animal species, its size, the operator’s experience, available 
equipment, and the clinical condition of the patient referred 
for biopsy (Vaden, 2005).
Ultrasound-guided biopsy is the most commonly used 
technique of kidney biopsy in dogs and cats. It consists of 
the collection of the kidney sample under ultrasound exami-
nation. This technique allows visualization of the kidney, 
evaluation of its size and internal structure, and depth of its 
location in the abdominal cavity, which enables the opera -
tor to precisely perform the kidney biopsy and minimize the 
risk of possible complications ( Rawlings et al., 2003). The 
kidney biopsy in anesthetized dogs may be carried out in 
the sternal position or the right or left lateral recumbency 
depending on the kidney from which the biopsy is to be 
collected. However, in cats the lateral position is preferable 
(Zatellia et al., 2005; Lees et al., 2011).
Contraindications for kidney biopsy include the absence 
of one kidney, pyonephrosis, perirenal abscesses, polycys -
tic kidney ( Fig.  9), hydronephrosis, severe kidney insuf -
ficiency, uncontrolled hypertension, bleeding disorders, 
severe anemia, extensive pyelonephritis, terminal kidney in-
sufficiency, and severe respiratory-circulatory insufficiency 
(Osborne et al., 1974; Haers et al., 2011).
8.2.4 Renal biomarkers
Renal biomarkers play a vital role in the early diagnosis of 
renal diseases and further facilitate early therapeutic inter -
vention in human as well as animal patients ( Kovarikova, 
2015). Urinary biomarkers can detect glomerular impair -
ment (albumin, immunoglobulin-G, C-reactive protein) 
and tubular impairment (acetyl-β-d-glucosaminidase, GGT, 
NGAL, RBP, clusterin, cystatin C, etc.) in early stages of 
renal diseases.
Symmetric dimethyl arginine (SDMA) is a highly sen -
sitive and specific renal biomarker in CKD dogs and cats. 
The levels of SDMA are increased months earlier than the 
rise of serum creatinine values. SDMA levels start elevated 
as early as a 40% reduction in GFR on the contrary serum 
creatinine levels are elevated only after 75% of nephrons 
gets damaged. Moreover, SDMA levels are independent of 
patient muscle mass ( Relford et  al., 2016 ). SDMA levels 
greater than 20  μg/dL ( <14 μg/dL: normal, 14–20  μg/dL: 
risk category) are typically seen in more advanced stages 
of kidney diseases (Courtesy of IDEXX, Westbrook, ME).
8.3 Management of CKD
The therapeutic approach to CKD should be tailored ac -
cording to each individual patient and stage of the disease. 
Frequent monitoring of the patient at regular intervals during 
the therapy allows the clinician to adjust the treatment based 
on the patient’s response. Guidelines recommended by IRIS, 
2017 for the management of CKD dogs and cats are
▪ Discontinue all the potentially nephrotoxic drugs irre -
spective of the severity of the disease.
▪ Identify the underlying causes for renal, prerenal, or 
postrenal disease if any and treatment should be given 
accordingly
▪ Avoid or minimize the renal proteinuria
▪ Restrict dietary intake of phosphorous
▪ Management of hypertension
▪ Consideration of renoprotective therapies includes renal 
diets, symptomatic therapy, correction of hormonal im -
balances, periodical reviews, etc.
Conservative medical management of CKD includes 
therapies other than treatment of active renal diseases (e.g., 
pyelonephritis, urinary obstruction), dialysis, or transplan -
tation. The therapies are designed to
1. Prevent and/or treat complications of decreased kidney 
function
2. Manage comorbid conditions that accompany kidney 
disease, and
3. Slow down loss of kidney function.
In planning conservative medical management, it is im-
portant to recognize and specifically treat active renal dis -
eases in the patient.
8.3.1 Management of GI signs of uremia
Gastrointestinal complications of CKD in dogs and cats 
include inappetence, nausea, vomiting, uremic stomatitis, 
halitosis, gastrointestinal hemorrhage, diarrhea, and hem -
orrhagic colitis. The treatment for these complications of 
CKD is largely symptomatic. Dietary changes, particularly 
protein restriction, may limit or ameliorate many of the gas-
trointestinal signs of uremia.
The management of prominent GI signs like anorexia, 
nausea, and vomiting can be managed by the administra -
tion of antacids, antiemetics, and cytoprotectant drugs. 
FIG.  9 Ultrasonographic image of a canine kidney showing multiple 
cysts.

Urinary system diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 10  159
The most commonly used antacid such as proton pump 
inhibitors (pantoprazole, omeprazole, rabeprazole, etc.) 
and H2 blockers (cimetidine, ranitidine, and famotidine, 
etc.) proved to be effective. Antiemetic agents like meto -
clopramide, ondansetron hydrochloride or dolasetron me -
sylate, and maropitant citrate can be given to arrest the 
emesis. A cryoprotectant drug such as sucralfate helps to 
smoothen the GI mucosa in cases of gastrointestinal ul -
cerations and hemorrhages due to uremia ( Perkovic et al., 
2002).
8.3.2 Management of hyperphosphatemia
The kidneys are the primary route of phosphorus excretion 
from the body. Any reduction in the glomerular filtration 
rate can create an accumulation of phosphorous within 
the body. Retention of excess phosphorus promotes renal 
secondary hyperparathyroidism, mineralization of tissues, 
and further progression of CKD. Hence, therapeutic goals 
should be designed to minimize phosphorus retention and 
hyperphosphatemia in CKD dogs and cats.
In stage I and II CKD patients, serum phosphorous 
levels remain normal because of a compensatory reduc -
tion in phosphorous reabsorption from the remaining 
intact nephrons. This compensatory adaptation is a con -
sequence of the phosphaturic effects of fibroblast growth 
factor 23 (FGF-23) and parathyroid hormones (PTH). 
Hyperphosphatemia stimulates the production of FGF-23 
and PTH levels even though phosphorous levels remain 
within the normal range initially. The development of 
hyperphosphatemia and consequent renal secondary hy -
perparathyroidism and impaired production of calcitriol 
occurs as the disease advances.
The first step in minimizing serum phosphorous is 
through restriction of phosphorus content in the foods. 
Commercial renal diets are manufactured with low phos -
phorus content and are often successful in achieving serum 
phosphorus targets in CKD Stage III. If commercial diets 
are not effective in maintaining serum phosphorous levels 
within the limits then phosphate binders should be incorpo-
rated along with diets. Intestinal phosphate-binding agents 
induce the formation of nonabsorbable salts of phosphorus 
within the lumen of the gastrointestinal tract, thus rendering 
phosphorus contained in the diet poorly absorbable.
The most commonly used intestinal phosphate-binding 
agents in dogs and cats are aluminum hydroxide, oxide, 
or carbonate @ 30–100  mg/kg/day, calcium salts (calcium 
acetate @ 60–90 mg/kg/day and calcium carbonate @ 90–
150 mg/kg/day) and lanthanum carbonate @ 30  mg/kg/day. 
The lanthanum carbonate is shown to be effective and is 
associated with minimal side effects. Therapy usually be -
gins at the lower end of the recommended dose range and is 
adjusted upward as needed every 4–6 weeks until the thera-
peutic target is reached (Elliot et al., 2006).
8.3.3 Metabolic acidosis
Metabolic acidosis occurs in less than 10% of cats with 
stages 2 and 3 CKD but in nearly 50% of cats with overt 
signs of uremia. Alkalinization therapy is indicated in CKD 
dogs and cats when blood pH level and bicarbonate con -
centration fall below the normal range. Shifting to a renal 
diet may improve acidosis by providing a pH-neutral diet. 
When diet alone is insufficient, administration of an alkalin-
izing salt, usually sodium bicarbonate (8–12  mg/kg po, ev-
ery 8–12 h) or potassium citrate (40–60 mg/kg every 8–12 h) 
can be tried. Potassium citrate offers the advantage of using 
a single drug to treat hypokalemia and acidosis. Response 
to alkalinization therapy should be assessed by performing 
blood gas analysis at weekly intervals after initiating ther -
apy and dosage adjusted until normalized.
8.3.4 Hypokalemia and hyperkalemia
Hypokalemia is the most common electrolyte abnormality 
seen in CKD dogs and cats due to inadequate potassium 
intake, increased urinary loss, and enhanced activation of 
the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system as a response to 
dietary salt restriction. Certain antihypertensive drugs like 
amlodipine may promote hypokalemia in cats with CKD.
Cats with hypokalemia should be given potassium sup -
plementation. Oral replacement is the safest and preferred 
route for administering potassium. Parenteral therapy is 
generally reserved for patients requiring emergency rever -
sal of hypokalemia or when they cannot accept oral therapy. 
Potassium gluconate or citrate are good choices for oral 
supplementation. Potassium citrate is initially given at a 
dosage of 40–60 mg/kg/day divided into two or three doses. 
If hypokalemic myopathy is present, it usually resolves 
within 1–5  days after initiating parenteral or oral potas -
sium supplements. Thereafter, potassium dosage should be 
adjusted based on the clinical response of the patient and 
serum potassium levels ( Lulich et  al., 1992; Henik et  al., 
1997).
Hyperkalemia occurs in advanced stages or end-stage 
renal disease in CKD dogs and cats. Emergency manage -
ment of hyperkalemia can be managed by parenteral ad -
ministration of sodium bicarbonate or glucose or insulin 
therapy based on the severity and condition of the patients.
8.3.5 Dehydration
Dehydration is a common complication of CKD and is of -
ten responsible for the deterioration of kidney function and 
promotes acute uremia. Because compensatory polydipsia 
prevents dehydration, ongoing fluid losses (pyrexia, vom -
iting, or diarrhea) or lack of access to drinking water, ex -
treme climatic conditions, and concurrent illnesses restrict 
fluid intake and promote dehydration. CKD cats are highly 
susceptible to chronic dehydration due to inadequate com -
pensatory polydipsia. Fluid administration is the mainstay

160 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
of therapy in dehydrated patients. The goal is to correct and 
prevent dehydration and its clinical effects. Acute correc -
tion of fluid is done by intravenous or subcutaneous admin-
istration depending on the severity of dehydration and the 
specific needs of the patient (Buranakarl et al., 2004).
8.3.6 Anemia
Anemia is most common in the later stages of CKD in dogs 
and cats. It occurs mainly due to insufficient production of 
erythropoietin, however iatrogenic and spontaneous blood 
loss, poor nutrition, iron deficiency, and reduced red blood 
cell lifespan augments the condition. Options for treating 
anemia of CKD include hormone replacement therapy. 
Erythropoietin therapy is generally the most effective ther -
apy, but the optimal therapeutic response depends on the 
underlying causes and severity of the disease.
Erythropoietin products most commonly used in dogs and 
cats include the recombinant human erythropoietin Epogen 
(EPO) and darbepoetin alpha (DPO). Administration of 
EPO has a dose-dependent increase in hematocrit, resulting 
in the correction of anemia and its associated clinical signs 
within approximately 2–8 weeks. Although EPO is usually 
effective in correcting anemia of CKD, initially, production 
of antibodies may be noticed (Cowgill et al., 1998).
Darbepoetin alfa is an erythropoiesis-stimulating agent, 
it has a longer duration of action and is less likely to induce 
anti-erythropoietin antibodies compared to EPO. The dose 
should be adjusted based on the response to therapy and 
periodical estimation of hematocrit values. Maintenance of 
normal hematocrit requires ongoing hormone therapy and 
monitoring. Failure to monitor the hematocrit and adjust the 
dose of DPO can result in severe polycythemia and death, 
particularly during the induction phase. Supplementation of 
iron dextran or iron sucrose is recommended for all patients 
receiving erythropoietin or darbepoetin therapy due to the 
depletion of iron reserves in the body.
8.3.7 Management of hypertension  
and proteinuria
Arterial hypertension is a common complication of CKD in 
dogs and cats and has been linked to renal, ocular, neuro -
logic, and cardiac complications. The diagnosis of arterial 
hypertension must be based on measuring blood pressure. 
ACEIs (e.g., enalapril and benazepril) and calcium channel 
blockers (e.g., amlodipine) are the preferred antihyperten -
sive drugs for dogs and cats with CKD, because they have 
the potential benefit of renoprotective actions. Clinical ex -
perience has shown amlodipine to be an effective antihy -
pertensive agent in dogs and cats with CKD ( Brown et al., 
2007; Plumb, 2008).
Appetizers, a variety of foods to stimulate appetite, 
hand feeding, and tube feedings such as nasogastric tubes 
or percutaneous enteric gastrotomy tubes have to be tried 
to  alleviate malnutrition in renal patients. Cases that are 
 refractory to medical therapy with severe uremia have to be 
managed by peritoneal dialysis (PD) or intermittent hemo -
dialysis (IHD) techniques to prolong the life of the patients. 
Patients with end-stage renal failure can plan for renal 
transplantation therapy.
8.4 Prognosis of CKD
The disease tends to be progressive in the advanced stages 
of CKD. Affected dogs may survive for months to a year 
or two depending on the management of the disease. Some 
cats have progressive diseases similar to dogs, but typi -
cally CKD progresses more slowly in cats. Patients in CKD 
stages III and IV should typically be evaluated every 3- to 
4-month intervals. Patients in CKD stages I and II often re-
quire less frequent monitoring, every 4–6 months approxi -
mately, once stable renal function has been established. 
However, patients with progressive CKD, proteinuria, or 
arterial hypertension should be monitored more frequently. 
Success of the therapy depends upon the early identification 
of the disease, the stage of disease, and effective therapeutic 
management of the disease.
9 Acute kidney injury
Acute kidney injury (AKI) is defined as a sudden decrease 
in renal function, resulting in a lack of excretion of nitrog -
enous waste substances like BUN and creatinine, leading to 
the accumulation of metabolic waste substances above the 
reference range. Sudden damage to nephrons results in the 
compromise of fluid, electrolyte, and acid-base regulatory 
functions of the kidney thereby establishing a state of azote-
mia in the body. The disease is characterized by depression, 
lethargy, weakness, anorexia, vomiting, diarrhea, dehydra -
tion, and change in urine output.
The etiology of AKI in dogs and cats includes toxic, in-
fectious, and ischemic causes that are the most common. 
Postrenal causes were due to obstruction or rupture of the 
urinary tract, obstruction might occur from uroliths, neo -
plasia, trauma, inflammation, fibrosis, blood or mucous, 
and congenital or acquired ureteral stenosis ( Cowgill and 
Francey, 2005).
A systematic diagnostic approach to diagnose AKI in -
cludes a detailed collection of history, a complete clinical 
examination to identify urinary output, dehydration, hypo -
tension, etc. Hematology, serum biochemistry to identify 
uremic changes in blood, microscopic agglutination test for 
leptospirosis, urinalysis to test specific gravity, proteinuria, 
and imaging diagnostic tests helps to confirm the disease.
Therapy involves the selection of appropriate antibiotics 
to treat infectious causes of renal failure; fluid therapy, ant-
acids, and antiemetics are to be given to counteract the ure-
mic effects of AKI. Specific antidotes and neutralizers must 
be given as per the prescribed dose rate in cases of toxic 
or chemical poisonings. Cases with severe azotemia might

Urinary system diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 10  161
require renal replacement therapies or renal transplanta -
tion. The mortality rate varies based on the cause, extent of 
damage, concurrent diseases, and timing of effectiveness of 
therapy, mortality associated with all causes of acute renal 
failure in dogs ranges from 56% to 80%.

163

Chapter 11
Diseases of the reproductive system of 
male dogs and cats
1 Diseases of testes and epididymis
1.1 Cryptorchidism
Cryptorchidism is the most common congenital defect of 
testes in which one or both testes fail to descend naturally 
into the scrotal sac ( Memon and Sirinarumitr, 2005 ). The 
condition may be unilateral or bilateral. Testes may be 
retained in the abdominal cavity, inguinal canal, or in an 
ectopic subcutaneous location between the superficial in -
guinal ring and the scrotum ( Evans and Christensen, 1993; 
Peter, 2001). Right-sided cryptorchids are common, with 
inguinal retention being more common ( Kawakami et al., 
1984; Turba and Willer, 1988; Ruble and Hird, 1993; Yates 
et al., 2003). A higher incidence of the condition has been 
reported in dogs (varies from 0.80% to 9.8%) compared to 
cats (1.7%) (Felumlee et al., 2012).
1.1.1 Occurrence
Cryptorchidism is believed to be a hereditary disorder and 
reported to be more prevalent in certain breeds of dogs 
such as toy and miniature Poodles, Yorkshire terriers, 
Chihuahuas, Boxers, Miniature Schnauzers, Pekingese, 
Pomeranian, English bulldogs, and Dachshunds. A higher 
incidence has been recorded in purebred and inbred dogs 
compared to mixed-breed dogs ( Memon and Sirinarumitr, 
2005; Memon, 2007). Offsprings, from cryptorchid parents, 
tend to have a higher incidence ( Gubbels et al., 2009 ). In 
the cat, the heritable nature of this defect is poorly known 
but is suspected as the Persian cats are predisposed to crypt-
orchidism ( Johnston and Kustritz, 2001a ; Griffin, 2006 ). 
Cryptorchidism is believed to be a sex-limited autosomal 
recessive trait (Memon and Sirinarumitr, 2005 ). The exact 
mode of inheritance of cryptorchidism is not known, but 
it is believed to be a multiple-gene effect ( Willis, 1989 ; 
Amann and Veeramachaneni, 2007).
1.1.2 Clinical manifestation
The common clinical signs are the absence of one or both 
testicles, inability to successfully breed (if both testicles are 
undescended) along with increased aggression, unwanted 
territorial behavior, and marking. Some dogs with unilateral 
cryptorchidism may evidence poor fertility.
1.1.3 Diagnosis
A positive diagnosis of the condition can be arrived at by 
physical examination, ultrasonography, and hormonal as -
say. It is usual to make a tentative diagnosis of cryptorchi -
dism if the testes are not palpable within the scrotum by 
8–10 weeks of age in dogs. In cats and dogs, neonatal testes 
are small, soft, and move up and down in the inguinal ca -
nal prior to puberty; therefore, inspection prior to puberty 
may falsely suggest a diagnosis of cryptorchidism (Memon, 
2007; Sojka, 1980). Thus, a definitive diagnosis should be 
made when the pet achieves puberty (7–9  months) when 
the inguinal rings of most dogs are closed and the size of 
the testes is larger (Johnston et al., 2001; Ley et al., 2003).
Abdominally retained testes are not palpable and the 
inguinal lymph nodes and fat may feel like small inguinal 
testes (Schulz et al., 1996 ) which can lead to an incorrect 
diagnosis. Unlike dogs, it may be possible to visually dif -
ferentiate between a castrated cat and a cryptorchid one, by 
the presence of spines on the penis (postpuberty). In cats, 
the penile spines disappear or get atrophied by 6 weeks fol-
lowing complete castration (Johnston and Kustritz, 2001a). 
Adult intact cryptorchid dogs can be differentiated from 
castrated dogs by an enlarged prostate (Olson et al., 1992).
The retained testes can be visualized by careful ultraso-
nographic examination of the abdomen and inguinal area. 
In one study, the sensitivity of ultrasonography was 96.6% 
and 100% for the detection of abdominal testes and inguinal 
testes, respectively (Felumlee et al., 2012).

164 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
Bilateral cryptorchid and castrated male dogs can be dif-
ferentiated by IM administration of either GnRH or hCG 
which leads to an increase in testosterone in cryptorchid 
dogs. Dogs are administered either GnRH (20  mg/kg or 
50 mg/dog) or hCG (100  IU/dog) and blood samples are 
collected for testosterone assay 60  min before, and 60  min 
later for GnRH and 12 and 24 h later for hCG. A substantial 
increase in serum testosterone concentrations in the post -
test blood samples is diagnostic of cryptorchidism (Memon, 
2007; Johnston et  al., 2001 ; Ley et  al., 2003 ). Diagnosis 
of cryptorchidism can be confirmed by finding the retained 
testes using invasive techniques like exploratory laparot -
omy or laparoscopy but the potential complications should 
be considered (Vannozzi et al., 2002; Miller et al., 2004).
Radiography is unrewarding due to the small size and 
nondistinct tissue density of the retained testis ( Ley et al., 
2003). The serum anti‐Müllerian hormone (AMH) concen-
trations in cryptorchid and intact dogs were found to be sig-
nificantly higher than in castrated dogs (Gharagozlou et al., 
2014) and can serve as a useful test, yet still need to be 
standardized.
1.1.4 Complications
Hip dysplasia, patellar dislocation, underdeveloped eyelids, 
abnormally small eyes, defects of the penis and prepuce, 
and umbilical hernia are some congenital disorders associ -
ated with cryptorchidism in dogs ( Pendergrass and Hayes, 
1975). Few toms affected with cryptorchidism may also 
show congenital abnormalities like bilateral medial patellar 
luxation, congenitally shortened tail, kinked tail, tetralogy 
of Fallot, tarsal deformity, microphthalmia, and upper eye -
lid agenesis (Johnston and Kustritz, 2001a).
Cryptorchid pets are predisposed to the development of 
testicular neoplasia (Yates et al., 2003). Sertoli cell tumors 
are commonly associated with cryptorchidism followed by 
seminomas, in canines ( Reif and Brodey, 1965). The sper-
matic cord attached to a retained testis is predisposed to tor-
sion (Johnston et al., 2001 ). Retained testes are incapable 
of normal spermatogenesis because the temperature inside 
the body is too high for spermatogenesis. Retained testes 
are smaller and the diameter of the seminiferous tubules is 
reduced by up to 60% as compared to normal scrotal testes 
(Kawakami et al., 1988a ). A bilateral cryptorchid male is 
usually sterile ( Peter, 2001). However, a unilateral crypt -
orchid animal can produce viable sperm but with reduced 
semen quality and can often impregnate an estrual female 
(Memon, 2007 ). However, sexual activity and libido are 
normal in cryptorchid males as the retained testicles are 
capable of secreting testosterone. This is probably because 
the interstitial or Leydig cells are not affected by body tem-
perature. Affected pets have androgen-dependent disorders 
such as unwanted territorial behavior, aggression, and mal-
odorous urine (Johnston et al., 2001; Badinand et al., 1972; 
Kawakami et al., 1993, 1995; Scott et al., 2002).
1.1.5 Prevention and therapy
Due to their hereditary nature, the use of affected males, 
their parents, and their siblings for breeding should be 
strongly discouraged. Affected dogs should be neutered as 
they can pass their disease to their offspring and are at risk 
of developing testicular cancer and spermatic cord torsion if 
kept intact (Memon, 2007; Johnston et al., 2001).
Bilateral castration or orchiectomy is the treatment of 
choice for cryptorchidism. Several surgical approaches 
have been described for orchiectomy in both dogs and cats; 
however, a ventral midline approach and laparotomy are 
generally used. The surgical approach to finding and re -
moving the cryptorchid testis depends on its location ( Ley 
et  al., 2003). Laparoscopic procedures can be effectively 
used in identifying and removing retained testes in dogs 
and cats (Memon, 2007; Miller et al., 2004). Single or mul-
tiport laparoscopic‐assisted approaches have been used for 
orchiectomy in cryptorchid dogs (Miller et al., 2004; Runge 
et al., 2014). Laparoscopic cryptorchidectomy was consid -
ered a safe and useful approach for dogs with testes retained 
in the abdomen (Lew et al., 2005).
Medical therapies using GnRH or hCG ( Micuda, 
1971; Humke, 1977 ; Loerssen, 1990 ; Ravaszova et  al., 
1995; Feldman and Nelson, 1996 ) or surgical relocation 
of the retained testis in the scrotal sac have been described 
(Kawakami et al., 1988b, 1990, 1991 ) but are not recom -
mended. The authors strongly discourage therapy due to the 
hereditary nature of the disease.
1.2 Orchitis/epididymitis
Orchitis is inflammation of the testis and epididymitis is 
inflammation of the epididymides. The conditions may 
occur separately, jointly (orchi-epididymitis), or with ex -
tension to the vaginal tunic and adhesions to the scrotum 
(peri-orchi-epididymitis) (Lein, 1977). However, clinically 
the term orchitis is generally used to indicate any disease 
of the scrotal contents, including periorchitis, epididymitis, 
and orchitis itself, and is identified as a swollen painful 
testis (Foster, 2012).
1.2.1 Occurrence
Young dogs are commonly affected with orchitis/epididy -
mitis from 11 months to 10 years (Szasz et al., 1994; Kadota 
et  al., 1995; Kowalzik et  al., 1996). Orchitis/epididymitis 
may be caused by bacteria (Brucella canis, Escherichia coli, 
Proteus vulgaris, Pseudomonas mallei, Staphylococcus  
species, Streptococcus  species), Mycoplasma canis , 
Blastomycosis and other fungi, and canine distemper virus 
(Johnston et al., 2001 ; Ley et al., 2003 ). Infectious agents 
may reach up to the reproductive tract as ascending infec -
tion from the prostate or urethra, by bacteremia, viremia, 
and by direct entry through external trauma or puncture

Diseases of the reproductive system of male dogs and cats  Chapter | 11  165
wound. Scrotal cestodiasis and Rhodotorula glutinis (yeast) 
have been found to be associated with orchitis/epididymi -
tis. Trauma and autoimmune disease may also be respon -
sible for the development of orchitis and epididymitis (Ley 
et al., 2003). Rickettsial infections such as ehrlichiosis and 
Rocky Mountain spotted fever (Ober et al., 2004) can be as-
sociated with testicular or epididymal infection. Spermatic 
cord or testicle torsion, scrotal hernia, and scrotal dermati -
tis may be the other reasons for orchitis. In tom, rare cases 
of orchitis have been reported such as after infections with 
Mycobacterium species, Brucella species, feline infectious 
peritonitis virus, and other aerobic bacteria introduced by 
traumatic injury, such as bite wounds. Noninfectious lym -
phocytic orchitis also has been reported (Ley et al., 2003).
Autoimmune orchitis may occur due to trauma or in -
flammation of testicular tissue or idiopathic origin ( Ley 
et  al., 2003). Disruption of the blood testes barrier either 
directly by trauma or from inflammation within the testis 
allows access of the previously immunologically isolated 
spermatozoal antigens to the immune system, infiltration 
of lymphocytes into the testes, and sensitization of T cells. 
Both cell-mediated and humoral defense systems activate 
that results in the destruction of spermatogenic tissue and 
the formation of antisperm antibodies ( Tung and Mahi-
Brown, 1990). Autoimmune orchitis was also found to oc -
cur with lymphocytic thyroiditis in 32% of Beagle dogs in 
one colony ( Fritz et al., 1976 ). Idiopathic autoimmune or -
chitis was reported in two Labrador retrievers who had fo -
cal inflammatory lesions in 20%–40% of the seminiferous 
tubules, and azoospermia ( Edward Allen and Patel, 1982 ; 
Edward Allen and Longstaffe, 1982).
1.2.2 Clinical manifestation
Orchitis/epididymitis may be acute and symptomatic or 
chronic and asymptomatic. The acute form is character -
ized by the sudden onset of painful swelling of the scrotal 
contents (Fig. 1). The possible signs associated with acute 
orchitis/epididymitis may be pyrexia, lethargy, hind limb 
lameness, scrotal edema, and purulent preputial discharge 
(Lein, 1977; Ellington et al., 1993 ; Dahlbom et al., 1997 ). 
Male dogs with chronic orchitis/epididymitis have clinical 
complaints of nonpainful enlargement of scrotal contents 
and sometimes atrophy of the unaffected testis (Lein, 1977).
1.2.3 Diagnosis
An initial diagnosis of orchitis/epididymitis is usually done 
by visual inspection and palpation of the enlarged testes. 
In acute cases of orchitis/epididymitis, the affected testes 
are painful, enlarged, and firm on palpation (if palpable) 
in both male dogs and cats. Dogs with acute orchitis/epi -
didymitis may resist handling the scrotal contents because 
of pain. Other diagnostic tools, such as ultrasonography of 
the scrotum, testes, and epididymides; semen collection 
for evaluation and culture; fine needle aspiration (FNA) of 
the affected testes or epididymides; and testing for canine 
brucellosis are useful in ruling out the differentials like tes-
ticular torsion, incarcerated scrotal herniation, hydrocele, 
hematoma, abscessation, testicular neoplasia and sperm 
granuloma (Johnston et al., 2001; Ley et al., 2003).
The epididymides are enlarged and doughy. Fever may 
be present very early in the hematogenous phase of the in -
fection. When the condition becomes chronic, the testis un-
dergoes degeneration, fibrosis, and atrophy. The testes may 
be soft (atrophic) or very firm and irregular (fibrotic). Due 
to fibrosis, the epididymides are usually “woody” on palpa-
tion. The formation of adhesions between the scrotum and 
testes may prevent free movement of the testes within the 
scrotum (Lein, 1977).
Ultrasonographic findings of orchitis do not show a 
characteristic pattern of echogenicity, but a patchy hy -
poechoic pattern is an indication of testicular inflammation 
(Pugh and Konde, 1991 ). In epididymitis, the ultrasono -
graphic findings showed that the epididymides were irregu-
lar in contour and may contain either hypoechoic areas and 
flocculent material (suppurative disease), or both hypo- and 
hyperechoic areas, with or without mineralization (granulo-
matous disease) (Ellington et al., 1993).
Semen can be collected from male dogs for evalua -
tion and submission for cytology and culture. Many dogs 
with orchitis or epididymitis experience pain and will not 
ejaculate. If the dog can ejaculate, semen samples can be 
FIG. 1 Orchitis in a male dog showing enlarged scrotum. (Photo cour-
tesy Dr. Anil Langer, Subject Matter Specialist, Distt Samba Jammu, and 
Kashmir.)

166 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
submitted for aerobic, anaerobic, and mycoplasma cultures. 
The growth of more than 10,000 organisms per milliliter of 
a single organism is a significant indication of the disease 
(Johnston et al., 2001; Ley et al., 2003).
Fine needle aspiration (FNA) of the affected testes or 
epididymides provides a sample for cytological examina -
tion and aerobic, anaerobic, and mycoplasma cultures. 
Large numbers of polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) 
are visualized in cases of suppurative orchitis/epididymi -
tis. Minimal or no exfoliative inflammatory response is 
observed in cases of granulomatous orchitis/epididymitis 
(Dahlbom et al., 1997). Dogs with acute orchitis or epididy-
mitis can tolerate FNA without sedation.
Orchitis, epididymitis, scrotal dermatitis, oligozoosper -
mia, and infertility all may be observed in the Brucella 
canis-affected dogs. Therefore, it is imperative to examine 
all the dogs for canine brucellosis, presented with scrotal 
enlargement, regardless of age or status as a breeding ani -
mal (Ley et al., 2003).
1.2.4 Therapy
Complete resolution or cure of orchitis or epididymitis is rare; 
therefore, the recommended treatment is the removal of af-
fected testes or orchiotomy (Johnston et al., 2001; Ley et al., 
2003). Antimicrobial therapy alone is rarely effective in the 
case of orchitis in dogs (Johnston et al., 2001; Ley et al., 2003); 
however, it should not be overlooked as a part of the treatment 
regimen. Dogs with bilateral orchitis/epididymitis should be 
castrated. In case of unilateral orchitis/epididymitis also, bilat-
eral castration is recommended and both the testis and epididy-
mis should be removed soon after the diagnosis; otherwise, 
atrophy of the contralateral testis may occur due to inflamma-
tion and increased intrascrotal temperature. However, in valu-
able stud dogs intended for breeding, unilateral orchiectomy 
sparing the nonaffected testis may be performed. Presurgical 
antibiotic therapy is useful to prevent the postsurgical com-
plication like the formation of a scirrhous cord, and a painful 
swelling of the remaining vasa deferens. Postsurgical antibiot-
ics and other supportive therapy are recommended (Johnston 
et al., 2001; Ley et al., 2003). Prognosis is better if neither atro-
phy nor fibrosis is evident by careful palpation and ultrasono-
graphic evaluation of the remaining testis.
1.3 Brucellosis
Canine brucellosis is caused by B. canis, a gram-negative, 
nonmotile, facultative intracellular coccobacillus bacteria 
(Galińska and Zagórski, 2013; von Bargen et al., 2012) that 
affects the entire reproductive system of male dogs. Cats 
can be considered an accidental host for brucellosis and 
usually becomes infected after contact with maintenance 
hosts such as infected cows (Garoussi et al., 2018). Cats can 
acquire the infection where B. abortus is endemic in cattle 
(Hariharan and Hariharan, 2017).
1.3.1 Occurrence
B. canis infection has worldwide distribution (Hensel et al., 
2018) except in Antarctica ( Gardner and Reichel, 1997 ). 
Outbreak reports of B. canis have progressively increased 
around the world in recent years ( Tymczak et  al., 2022). 
Incidence has been reported higher in stray dogs in compar-
ison with owned dogs ( Lovejoy et al., 1976 ; Brown et al., 
1976) probably due to the uncontrolled contact among stray 
dogs. There is no evidence of breed predisposition in dogs 
(Hollett, 2006; Santos et al., 2021). Anti-B. canis antibodies 
have been detected in domestic and wild canids (Carmichael 
and Greene, 1990; Oliveira-Filho et al., 2012) and domestic 
and wild felines (Oliveira-Filho et al., 2012; Larsson et al., 
1984; Almeida et  al., 2013 ). Some previous reports con -
sider felines to be resistant to brucellosis ( Carmichael and 
Greene, 1990). In one study, Brucella infection in cats was 
found as transiently mild and temporary infection mainly in 
male and stray cats aged 1–2 years (Garoussi et al., 2018).
Infected animals shed the organisms primarily through 
semen and urine, and to a lesser extent, through saliva and 
nasal secretions ( Johnson and Walker, 1992 ; Serikawa 
et  al., 1984; Carmichael and Joubert, 1988 ). Oral, nasal, 
conjunctival, and genital mucosa serve as common routes 
for B. canis  infection ( Santos et  al., 2021 ). The infection 
is primarily transmitted through ingestion or licking of 
contaminated materials or fomites and respiratory inhala -
tion. Sexual or venereal transmission can occur between in-
fected male and female dogs ( Ley et al., 2003 ). Therefore, 
the infection spreads rapidly among closely confined dogs. 
Infected dogs shed B. canis in the semen, particularly dur -
ing the first 8  weeks after infection; however, dogs may 
continue to shed the organism intermittently in the semen 
for years ( Hollett, 2006 ; Carmichael and Greene, 1990 ). 
Blood transfusions can be a source of infection of B. canis, 
as the organisms develop intermittent but persistent bac -
teremia (Hollett, 2006; Carmichael and Greene, 1990 ). B. 
canis have also been isolated from blood-sucking fleas and 
ticks; however, transmission via these parasites is yet to be 
confirmed (Peres et al., 1981). Once infected the dogs serve 
as a reservoir and act as a continuous source of infection 
(Hollett, 2006; Keid et al., 2017 ). Transmission of brucel -
losis from dogs to humans is quite rare and a slight but real 
zoonotic potential exists (Johnston et al., 2001).
1.3.2 Clinical manifestation
In males, the classical clinical signs of B. canis infection 
include epididymitis, orchitis, prostatitis, scrotal dermatitis, 
loss of libido, pain on palpation of the lower abdomen, oli -
gozoospermia, sperm abnormalities, and infertility (Johnston 
et al., 2001; Carmichael and Kenney, 1968; Olsen and Palmer, 
2014). Epididymitis has been reported to be the more com -
mon primary lesion than orchitis ( Carmichael and Kenney, 
1968). In chronic infections, testicular  atrophy  accompanying

Diseases of the reproductive system of male dogs and cats  Chapter | 11  167
teratozoospermia, sperm agglutination due to the formation 
of antisperm antibodies, and eventually spermatogenic arrest 
may be observed (Johnson and Walker, 1992; Carmichael and 
Kenney, 1968). Furthermore, unspecific signs such as uveitis, 
glomerulonephritis, osteomyelitis, disco-spondylitis, menin-
gitis, and pyogranulomatous dermatitis have been reported to 
occur in dogs infected with B. canis, probably secondary to 
bacteremia (Ley et al., 2003; Hofer et al., 2012; Kerwin et al., 
1992). Small testicular abscesses and prostate enlargement 
due to prostatitis with pelvic compression can be visualized 
by ultrasonography (Makloski, 2011).
Infected dogs often develop no clinical signs at all other 
than enlarged lymph nodes, especially the submandibular 
and retropharyngeal. Intermittent bacteremia may last for 
years. Fever is not a typical clinical feature in dogs whether 
infected naturally or experimentally. Episodic fever may 
be detected in the affected dogs by careful observation and 
monitoring, but it usually goes unobserved. Infected males 
usually remain unnoticed if they do not have reproductive 
activity (Makloski, 2011; Moore and Kakuk, 1969).
1.3.3 Diagnosis
A precise clinical diagnosis of canine brucellosis is not 
possible; therefore, laboratory tests are essential to make a 
definitive diagnosis. However, the laboratory diagnosis of 
B. canis  infection depends upon the stage of the disease. 
Culture and Isolation of B. canis  may be achieved from 
blood, lymph node aspirates, bone marrow, or infected 
tissues or discharges ( Carmichael and Shin, 1996 ). As B. 
canis infection has zoonotic potential, its culture poses a 
considerable risk for laboratory personnel therefore bio -
safety level 3 conditions are required (Wallach et al., 2004; 
Godoy et al., 1979 ; Sam et al., 2012 ). Blood culture is the 
most accurate test available in the first 8  weeks follow -
ing infection ( Johnson and Walker, 1992 ; Carmichael and 
Shin, 1996). Semen samples should be subjected to culture 
between 3 and 11 weeks after infection. After this period, 
due to intermittent shedding of B. canis in the semen with 
low concentrations, cultures are often negative (Carmichael 
and Greene, 1990 ). The organism should be isolated from 
urine samples mostly between 8 and 30 weeks postinfection 
(Carmichael and Greene, 1990 ; Greene and Carmichael, 
2012). As B. canis is a fastidious organism, therefore one 
negative culture does not rule out the disease.
Direct diagnosis of B. canis  infection can also be 
made by detecting the genomic DNA of the organism in 
biological samples using polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
(Keid et  al., 2007 ). Whole blood is the sample of choice 
for PCR and should be preferred over serum ( Keid et al., 
2009). Semen and tissue samples may also be used for PCR 
(Greene and Carmichael, 2012 ). However, the absence of 
bacteremia, antimicrobial drug usage, and PCR inhibitors 
(heparin) in blood samples may also influence the PCR re -
sults (Greene and Carmichael, 2012).
Antibodies against B. canis  infection can be found 
2  weeks postinfection and can be detected via serology (Ruble 
and Hird, 1993). Serologic tests are useful diagnostic tools 
as infected dogs remain serologically positive for several 
months even in the absence of bacteremia. The frequently 
used serologic tests for the diagnosis of B. canis infection 
are tube agglutination test (TAT), rapid slide agglutination 
test (RSAT) ( George and Carmichael, 1974 ), rapid slide 
agglutination test with 2-mercaptoethanol (2ME-RSAT) 
(Badakhsh et al., 1982), and agar gel immunodiffusion test 
(AGID) (Myers et al., 1972). RSAT and 2ME-RSAT are the 
commonly used serologic tests for screening for B. canis in-
fection at kennels. As a semiquantitative test TAT is consid-
ered a confirmatory test for RSAT or 2ME-RSAT ( Greene 
and Carmichael, 2012 ; Carmichael and Greene, 1998 ). 
However, none of the serological tests is completely satis -
factory. False-positive results are commonly reported due 
to cross-reaction with other bacteria such as Pseudomonas, 
Bordetella bronchiseptica, Streptococcus, Staphylococcus, 
Salmonella, Yersinia enterocolitica , and Escherichia coli  
(Keid et  al., 2009 ; Wanke, 2004; Bounaadja et  al., 2009 ; 
Nielsen et al., 2007 ). Therefore, the final diagnosis should 
be confirmed by B. canis isolation by culture or PCR diag-
nostics (Keid et al., 2007, 2015).
Several enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) 
protocols have been reported for the diagnosis of B. canis 
infection with varying sensitivity and specificity according 
to the antigen used ( Johnson and Walker, 1992; Mateu-de-
Antonio et  al., 1994 ; Lucero et  al., 2010 ). However, this 
method is more sensitive than agglutination methods and 
AGID (Johnson and Walker, 1992; Wanke, 2004). ELISAs 
can detect antibodies in chronic cases which may be diag -
nosed negative by 2ME-RSAT and AGID ( Wanke et  al., 
2012). Antibodies can be detected by ELISA at 30  days 
postinfection, and the assay may be useful as a confirma -
tory test ( Lucero et  al., 2010 ; Barkha et  al., 2011 ; Ebani 
et al., 2003).
1.3.4 Therapy
The treatment of canine brucellosis with antibiotics is not 
encouraged, because even after antibiotic treatment there 
is uncertainty about the cure of the disease, and the risk 
of transmission of the disease to humans and other dogs 
persists ( Holst et al., 2012 ; Cosford, 2018 ). It is impera -
tive to know that antibiotic therapy does not eliminate 
B. canis ; therefore, the absence of the clinical signs af -
ter antibiotic therapy is not indicative of the absence of 
the infection. Singly housed pets may be castrated and 
administrated antibiotics to decrease bacteremia and sub -
sequent shedding of the organism ( Johnson and Walker, 
1992). The suggested antibiotic regimens include mino -
cycline (25 mg/kg orally once daily for 14 days) in combi -
nation with dihydrostreptomycin (5  mg/kg IM twice daily 
for 7 days) and tetracycline (30  mg/kg PO twice daily for

168 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
21  days) in combination with streptomycin (20  mg/kg 
1 M once daily for 14 days) ( Johnson and Walker, 1992 ; 
Nicoletti, 1991 ).
1.3.5 Prevention and control
Commercially available vaccines are not available for 
the prevention of canine brucellosis ( Santos et al., 2021 ). 
Therefore, control measures that need to be followed are (i) 
screening tests for dogs and kennels suspected of brucel -
losis, (ii) treatment or euthanasia of infected dogs, and (iii) 
elimination of the bacteria from the environment (Makloski, 
2011). Newly acquired dogs must be kept isolated for at 
least 1 month and should only be introduced in the kennel 
after two negative diagnostic test results with an interval of 
1  month. Kennels should be considered disease free only 
after all animals have been tested and found negative for 3 
consecutive months ( Johnson and Walker, 1992 ). Infected 
kennels must adopt stringent disinfection procedures and 
segregate feeding utensils and other materials to prevent the 
spreading of infection ( Makloski, 2011). B. canis does not 
survive for prolonged periods under environmental condi -
tions and can be quickly eliminated by most disinfectants 
including 1% sodium hypochlorite, 70% ethanol, etha -
nol/iodine solutions, glutaraldehyde, formaldehyde, etc. 
(Makloski, 2011 ). Equipment can be decontaminated by 
autoclaving at 120°C for at least 15  min or by dry heat at 
160–170°C for at least 1  h. Even, boiling for 10  min also 
inactivates the Brucella organism (Center for Food Security 
and Public Health, 2012). Dog owners and kennel employ-
ees should be properly educated about the transmission and 
zoonotic risk involved with B. canis  infection and avoid 
contact with infected dogs and secretions, especially during 
parturition or abortion. The development of effective and 
accurate B. canis-specific diagnostic methods and vaccines 
would be extremely helpful to prevent canine brucellosis.
1.4 Testicular neoplasm
Testicular neoplasia has been reported to be common in 
dogs while rare in cats ( Ley et al., 2003 ). Testicular neo -
plasia is the most common reproductive tract tumor and 
the second most commonly occurring tumor after skin 
neoplasia in dogs ( Johnston et al., 2001 ). There are three 
main types of testicular tumors: Sertoli cell tumor (SCT), 
seminoma (SEM), and interstitial (Leydig) cell tumor (ICT) 
(Kennedy et  al., 1998 ; Maclachlan and Kennedy, 2002 ; 
Gazin et al., 2022 ). Most of these tumors show benign be -
havior (Kennedy et al., 1998), the metastasis being reported 
rarely and associated mostly with seminomas ( Kennedy 
et al., 1998; Takiguchi et al., 2001). Testicular tumors may 
be unilateral or bilateral, and multiple cell types may be 
present (Johnston et al., 2001).
SCTs arise from the Sertoli cells/nurse cells of the 
seminiferous tubule. Mostly SCTs are slow-growing and 
noninvasive tumors that are usually firm, nodular, and pale 
yellow to gray. SCTs are either hormonally nonproductive 
or secrete high concentrations of estrogen and inhibin and 
cause the development of clinical signs of feminization. 
SEMs are the neoplasm of spermatogenic cells. These tu -
mors are slow growing, noninvasive, mostly hormonally si-
lent, usually soft on palpation, gray to white, and lobulated. 
ICTs arise from the cells in the interstitial space surround -
ing the seminiferous tubules. ICTs are also slow growing 
and noninvasive. ICTs are usually an incidental finding at 
necropsy and are almost always located in descended testes 
(Ley et al., 2003). They are usually hormonally silent, soft 
on palpation, and brown-orange on the cross section. Other 
tumors, such as fibrosarcoma, hemangiosarcoma, anaplas -
tic carcinoma, gonadoblastoma, embryonic carcinoma, 
sarcoma, lymphoma, and granulosa cell tumor, are rarely 
occurring tumors in the testis ( Johnston et  al., 2001 ; Ley 
et al., 2003).
1.4.1 Occurrence
Higher age and cryptorchidism are the main predispos -
ing factors for the development of canine testicular tu -
mors (Canadas et al., 2016 ; Ortega Pacheco et al., 2006 ). 
Neoplasia can occur in both descended and undescended 
testes; however, the frequency is higher in retained testes 
(Johnston et al., 2001; Ley et al., 2003) (Fig. 2). The mean 
age of dogs diagnosed with testicular tumors was 9–11 years 
(Gazin et al., 2022; Baioni et al., 2017; Grieco et al., 2008; 
Liao et al., 2009 ; Nascimento et al., 2020 ) with a range of 
2–19 years (Johnston et al., 2001). Certain breeds, including 
Shelties, Collie, Boxers, German Shepherds, Poodles, Fox 
Terriers, Afghan Hounds, Norwegian Elkhounds, Shetland 
sheepdogs, and Yorkshire Terriers, are predisposed to testic-
ular tumors (Gazin et al., 2022; Liao et al., 2009; Hohšteter 
et  al., 2014; Manuali et  al., 2020 ). SCT, SEM, and ICTs 
occur with about equal frequency in descended testes ( Ley 
et al., 2003). In retained testes, mostly SCT and SEM occur 
while the occurrence of ICT is very rare (Gazin et al., 2022; 
Liao et al., 2009; Nascimento et al., 2020). The exact etiol-
ogy of tumor formation continues to be poorly understood. 
It has been speculated that in cryptorchid testes, an altera -
tion in thermoregulation predisposes the testis to neoplasia 
(Ley et al., 2003).
1.4.2 Clinical manifestation
Scrotal or testicular enlargement is the usual complaint 
or clinical sign. Clinical signs specific to a paraneoplas -
tic syndrome may be observed in SCT-affected dogs. 
Clinical signs specific to metastasis may be seen in dogs 
with malignant tumors accompanied by distant metastases 
(Johnston et al., 2001). The tumor may be accompanied by 
infertility and dermatoses (acanthosis, seborrhoea) ( Peters 
et al., 2001).

Diseases of the reproductive system of male dogs and cats  Chapter | 11  169
1.4.3 Diagnosis
Sometimes pet owners are not aware of any problem and the 
neoplastic mass is found by veterinarian on routine physical 
examination, or examination for another problem. Palpation or 
ultrasound of the scrotum provides a presumptive diagnosis. 
Painless scrotal or testicular enlargement on physical exami-
nation and age at diagnosis provides a presumptive diagnosis 
of neoplasia instead of orchitis ( Johnston et  al., 2001; Ley 
et al., 2003). Pain develops in cases of rapid growth, bleed-
ing in the tumor, or upon cryptorchism. Azoospermia and/
or oligospermia are frequently present (Peters et  al., 2001). 
The neoplastic testis may or may not be significantly enlarged 
and lobulated. The contralateral testis may be either normal or 
atrophied. Atrophy of the contralateral testis may occur due 
to altered hormone production by the neoplastic tumor or in-
creased intrascrotal temperature or pressure necrosis caused 
by the enlarged testis (Johnston et al., 2001; Ley et al., 2003).
Ultrasonographic visualization of tumors may show 
disrupt internal architecture of the testis with hyper- or hy -
poechoic foci, which may or may not be surrounded by a 
well-defined hyperechoic capsule. However, tumor type 
cannot be differentiated by ultrasound ( Johnston et  al., 
2001). To determine the cause of the mass, either FNA, core 
biopsy, incisional biopsy, or excisional biopsy must be per-
formed (Ley et al., 2003).
The combination of clinical anamnesis, macroscopic 
pattern of the tumor, histological analysis, and immunohis-
tochemical characteristics can establish a correct diagnosis 
(Ciaputa et al., 2012).
1.4.4 Therapy
Bilateral orchiectomy is recommended; however, unilat -
eral orchiectomy may be considered in valuable breeding 
dogs (Johnston et  al., 2001; Ley et  al., 2003). In the case 
of cryptorchid animals, both testes should be removed. The 
prognosis is good after orchiectomy if there is no evidence 
of metastasis. In the case of metastases, the prognosis is 
guarded to grave and either chemotherapy or irradiation 
therapy is instituted after surgery. Further supportive treat -
ment is also needed in dogs that have concurrent male femi-
nizing syndrome with bone marrow suppression until the 
signs resolve but with a guarded prognosis (Ley et al., 2003).
1.5 Testicular torsion/spermatic cord torsion
Testicular torsion is more appropriately termed spermatic 
cord torsion.
1.5.1 Occurrence
The incidence is uncommon in dogs and is quite rare in cats 
(Mattoon and Davidson, 2021 ). The condition may occur 
in all age groups of dogs. No breed predisposition has been 
reported (Johnston et al., 2001).
1.5.2 Clinical manifestation
The common clinical signs reported with spermatic cord 
torsion include acute onset of abdominal pain, abdominal 
distention, acute scrotal/testicular swelling and pain, vom -
iting, lethargy, anorexia, stiff gait or reluctance to move, 
dysuria, hematuria, and pyrexia ( Pearson and Kelly, 1975; 
Koch et  al., 1997 ; Miyabayashi et  al., 1990 ; Heyneman 
et  al., 1996; Naylor and Thompson, 1979 ; Ganesh et  al., 
1994). The condition may be asymptomatic in cases of a 
low degree of spermatic cord torsion. Giuliano reported an 
asymptomatic and incidental finding of testicular torsion in 
a 4- to 5-month-old male cat presented for routine castration 
(Giuliano, 2013). Spermatic cord torsion is most commonly 
reported in conjunction with retained testes, which in some 
cases there is associated neoplasia. Neoplastic testes are 
heavier and more pendulous and may predispose to sper -
matic cord torsion ( Johnston et  al., 2001 ). Nonneoplastic 
testes are enlarged after torsion of the spermatic cord due 
to venous occlusion edema and inflammation ( Naylor and 
Thompson, 1979 ). Ischemic necrosis, intratesticular hem -
orrhage, and epididymal edema can be the  histological 
FIG.  2 Testicular neoplasia in a cryptorchid male dog (the large one: 
undescended right neoplastic testicle, and normal one: left descended tes -
ticle). (Photo courtesy Dr. Ankit Ahuja, Assistant Professor, Department 
of Veterinary Clinical Complex, DGCN College of Veterinary and Animal 
Sciences, Palampur, Himachal Pradesh.)

170 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 findings of affected nonneoplastic testes ( Pearson and 
Kelly, 1975; Koch et al., 1997; Heyneman et al., 1996).
1.5.3 Diagnosis
A presumptive diagnosis of spermatic cord torsion is made 
based on clinical signs and the presence of concurrent crypt-
orchidism in the dog (Pearson and Kelly, 1975; Naylor and 
Thompson, 1979 ; Ganesh et  al., 1994 ). Ultrasonographic 
examination revealed a uniform decrease in parenchymal 
echogenicity in testes with a torsed spermatic cord (Mattoon 
and Davidson, 2021; Peter and Jakovljevic, 1992). The ab-
sence of blood flow to and from the affected testis may be 
observed using color Doppler ultrasonography ( Mattoon 
and Davidson, 2021 ). However, a definitive diagnosis can 
be achieved by exploratory surgery (Ley et al., 2003).
1.5.4 Therapy
The preferred treatment is surgical removal of the affected 
testis and spermatic cord. In the case of cryptorchidism, a 
heritable defect, bilateral orchidectomy is recommended 
(Johnston et al., 2001). Additional supportive care and treat-
ment may be needed in the perioperative period.
2 Diseases of the prostate
2.1 Benign prostatic hypertrophy/hyperplasia
Benign prostatic hypertrophy/hyperplasia (BPH) is the 
most common age-related disorder which is characterized 
by an increase in epithelial cell size (hypertrophy) and cell 
numbers (hyperplasia) of the prostate gland with the latter 
being more marked ( Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b ; Peter 
and Widmer, 2003).
2.1.1 Occurrence
BPH occurs in almost every intact male dog with a preva -
lence of 80% in ≥6 years and 95% in dogs ≥9 years old 
(Ruetten et  al., 2021 ) and a mean age of 8  years ( Read 
and Bryden, 1995 ). Prostatic volume in dogs with BPH 
was found to be 2–6.5 times higher than that of unaf -
fected dogs of similar body weight. BPH is very rare in 
cats ( Johnston and Kustritz, 2001c ). Age-related increase 
in 5 ά-dihydrotestosterone (DHT), a metabolite of testos -
terone formed from the action of the (inhibitable) enzyme 
5ά-reductase, is primarily responsible for BPH. Higher lev-
els of DHT are believed to stimulate the enlargement of the 
prostate by enhancing growth in the stromal and glandular 
compartments ( Memon, 2007 ). There is an increased es -
trogen/testosterone ratio in BPH-affected dogs. Estrogens 
enhance androgen receptors and act synergistically with 
an overproduction of DHT in potentiating the hyperplastic 
process (Barsanti and Finco, 1986). Due to hormone depen-
dency, BPH occurs spontaneously only in intact dogs or in 
castrated male dogs treated with androgens ( Johnston and 
Kustritz, 2001b).
2.1.2 Clinical manifestation
BPH affects nearly every intact male dog; however, not all 
dogs show clinical signs. Serous to serosanguineous fluid 
dripping from the urethra is the primary sign of BPH (Read 
and Bryden, 1995). Other clinical signs associated with BPH 
may include difficulty in urination, rectal tenesmus, constipa-
tion, hematuria, and hemospermia due to pressure caused by 
enlarging prostate both on the urethra and the rectum (Fig. 3). 
Occasionally, dysuria or stranguria may occur. Usually, sys-
temic signs of illness are not observed, and the affected dogs 
FIG. 3 Indicating how enlarged prostate compresses both urethra and rectum.

Diseases of the reproductive system of male dogs and cats  Chapter | 11  171
remain alert, active, and afebrile ( Memon, 2007; Johnston 
and Kustritz, 2001b; Peter and Widmer, 2003; Smith, 2008).
2.1.3 Diagnosis
Diagnosis of BPH is usually presumptive based on a thor -
ough history, clinical signs, physical examination, exami -
nation of prostatic fluid via semen collection or prostatic 
massage, prostatic imaging (ultrasonography or radiogra -
phy), and response to therapy (Memon, 2007; Smith, 2008). 
The complete blood count is usually normal. Bacterial cul -
tures of seminal fluid and urine are negative unless the in -
fection is superimposed on BPH ( Memon, 2007; Johnston 
and Kustritz, 2001b; Peter and Widmer, 2003).
The size and texture of the prostate can be accessed 
by transrectal palpation using a gloved, lubricated finger. 
A normal prostate can be palpated symmetric, smooth, bi-
lobed, and “walnut-shaped” with a dorsal median raphe. 
The cranial extent of the prostate may be difficult to palpate 
in severe cases of BPH; therefore, it may require simulta -
neous palpation of the prostate with the gloved finger and 
concurrent placing upward pressure on the caudal abdo -
men to move the prostate back within reach (Memon, 2007; 
Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b). Hemospermia is a common 
finding in manually collected semen. A prostatic wash or 
urethral brush technique may be used to collect prostate 
fluid or cells in case semen samples cannot be collected. 
Ultrasonography shows prostatomegaly with homogenous 
parenchyma, with or without a cavitating cystic lesion in 
BPH. Radiographic examination of the abdomen may reveal 
cranial displacement of the bladder and dorsal displacement 
of the colon in case of BPH; however, as a distinct entity 
the prostate with BPH may not be observed (Memon, 2007; 
Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b).
Definitive diagnosis of BPH can only be made by biopsy 
of the gland, either trans or perirectal, or transabdominally. 
Common histopathologic findings in BPH are dilated acini 
surrounded by smooth muscle and fibrous connective tis -
sue and the absence of inflammatory cells or organisms. 
Biopsy is an invasive technique and rarely used; therefore, 
BPH is most often diagnosed by confirmation of prostatic 
enlargement and exclusion of other prostatic gland disor -
ders (e.g., prostatitis, neoplasia) ( Memon, 2007; Johnston 
and Kustritz, 2001b; Peter and Widmer, 2003).
2.1.4 Therapy
Generally, dogs with BPH are treated only when they show 
clinical symptoms. The recommended treatment is castra -
tion for most dogs suffering from BPH. The prognosis for 
recovery is good and prostate involution starts soon after 
castration and the volume reduces by 50% within 3 weeks 
and by 70%–75% within 9 weeks. Serum DTH concentra -
tions also decrease and urethral bleeding ceases ( Memon, 
2007; Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b).
For valuable breeding dogs, treatments of BPH us -
ing various pharmacological agents have been suggested. 
Estrogenic compounds such as diethylstilbestrol and es -
tradiol cypionate have been used to treat BPH. However, 
these compounds are not recommended due to their poten -
tial side effects including thrombocytopenia, leukopenia, 
and fatal aplastic anemia ( Memon, 2007 ; Johnston and 
Kustritz, 2001b). Synthetic progestins like oral megestrol 
acetate, injectable medroxyprogesterone acetate, and im -
plant chlormadinone acetate have also been used to treat 
BPH ( Bamberg-Thalen and Linde-forsberg, 1993 ). These 
compounds also have complications and may exert negative 
feedback on the pituitary, decreasing gonadotropin release 
and serum testosterone concentration, therefore, are not rec-
ommended for the treatment of dogs with BPH ( Memon, 
2007; Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b ). Antiandrogen like 
flutamide has been described for the treatment of BPH in 
research dogs. Flutamide was reported as safe, effective, 
and well-tolerated in dogs; however, it is not approved for 
use in veterinary medicine in many countries ( Romagnoli, 
2006). Other compound like Win 49596, an androgen re -
ceptor antagonist, and FR145687, a steroid 5a-reductase 
inhibitor, also have been described to be used for reduc -
ing prostatic size in research dogs; however, these are not 
commercially available (Nakayama et al., 1997 ; Juniewicz 
et al., 1990).
Finasteride, a synthetic steroid 5 ά-reductase inhibitor 
can be used to reduce prostatic size in BPH-affected dogs 
without adversely affecting semen quality or serum testos -
terone concentration ( Sirinarumitr et al., 2001 ). However, 
finasteride is not approved for use in dogs in the United 
States (Memon, 2007).
A new development in the treatment of prostate disease 
is the use of GnRH agonists (Romagnoli, 2006; Trigg et al., 
2001). These compounds block steroidogenesis and thus 
can be utilized to control BPH, without side effects. GnRH 
agonist downregulates GnRH receptors at the gonadotropes 
in the pituitary gland and suppresses the function of the 
hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. This results in a de -
crease in the LH and FSH release, and ultimately decreased 
concentrations of gonadal steroid hormones (progesterone, 
testosterone) and their by-products. Deslorelin implants 
(0.5–1.0 mg/kg body weight) were successfully used in 
adult dogs and decreased prostate volume by >50% and 
serum testosterone by around 90% (relative to controls) at 
6 weeks after implantation (Romagnoli, 2006).
2.2 Prostatitis
Prostatitis is an inflammation of the prostate gland and oc -
curs often due to bacterial infection in dogs. Prostatitis can 
occur at any age but commonly occur in older dogs when 
the prostate is compromised by BPH or cysts, while rare or 
nonexistent in castrated dogs due to atrophy of the prostate

172 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
gland (Wallace, 2001). Prostatic infection may progress to 
the development of intraparenchymal abscesses ( Johnston 
and Kustritz, 2001b). Prostatitis is also less common in cats 
than in dogs, probably due to the rare occurrence of other 
predisposing factors, such as BPH and squamous metapla -
sia (Palmieri et al., 2022).
2.2.1 Occurrence
Infection occurs most commonly as ascending from the ure-
thra; however, hematogenous spread or extension from the tes-
tes, epididymis, or peritoneal cavity may occur (Dorfman and 
Barsanti, 1995). Prostatitis is usually caused by Escherichia 
coli or Proteus vulgaris infection. Other common isolates in-
clude Staphylococcus spp., Streptococcus spp., Pseudomonas 
spp., Klebsiella  spp. , Enterobacter spp. , Pasteurella, and 
Haemophilus. Mycoplasma spp. and/or Ureaplasma spp. 
are also possible opportunistic pathogens. Brucella canis 
can also infect the prostate. Fungi like Blastomyces derma-
titidis, Cryptococcus neoformans, and Coccidioides immitis 
may be the cause of infection in the prostate (Memon, 2007; 
Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b; Palmieri et al., 2022).
Most cases of prostatitis in cats begin secondary to 
the invasion of pathogens in the urinary tract ( Bartges and 
Barsanti, 2000). However, bacterial urinary tract infections 
occur very less frequently in cats than in dogs and only 1%–
2% of cats are affected during their lifetime ( Dorsch et al., 
2019). The most common isolate in cats is E. coli (Dorsch 
et al., 2019; Roura et al., 2002).
Except in mild cases, it is usually difficult to collect an 
ejaculate. The culture of the third fraction of the ejaculate 
or urine obtained by cystocentesis is indicated. Urinalysis 
will reveal pyuria, hematuria, bacteriuria, and perhaps an 
increase in squamous epithelial cells. The urine culture will 
usually be positive; gram-negative colony counts >105 mL−1 
are suggestive of infection (Memon, 2007).
2.2.2 Clinical manifestation
Clinical signs of prostatitis vary with the progression of the 
disease. The condition may be acute or chronic. Dogs with 
acute prostatitis may have a fever, anorexia, depression, 
straining to urinate or defecate, caudal abdominal pain, he -
maturia, pain on rectal palpation, and sporadically edema of 
the scrotum, prepuce, and hindlimb (Dorfman and Barsanti, 
1995). Dogs with chronic prostatitis may be asymptom -
atic or may have hematuria, lethargy, anorexia, straining 
to defecate, poor semen quality, infertility, decreased li -
bido, intermittent urethral discharge varying in character 
from clear to bloody or purulent ( Johnston and Kustritz, 
2001b; Palmieri et  al., 2022 ). In case prostatic abscesses 
become very large, the dog may have tenesmus or dysuria. 
Generalized peritonitis may develop due to the rupture of 
an abscess that results in lethargy, fever, pain, and vomiting 
(Peter and Widmer, 2003).
2.2.3 Diagnosis
Diagnosis of prostatitis is based on history, physical ex -
amination, transrectal examination, ultrasonography, radi -
ography, hematology, urinalysis, prostatic fluid analysis, 
and bacterial cultures ( Smith, 2008 ). In acute cases, the 
prostate is often very painful on palpation and is typi -
cally normal to slightly enlarged, while in chronically af -
fected dogs the prostate is often normally contoured with 
no pain (Smith, 2008). On ultrasonography of the infected 
prostate, focal, or diffuse hypoechoic changes, giving the 
parenchyma a mottled or “moth-eaten” appearance are 
visualized; occasionally, diffuse the slightly hyperechoic 
appearance of the prostate may be observed in chronic 
prostatitis. Prostatomegaly or rarely mineralization (miner-
alization is more common in chronic prostatitis than acute 
cases) within the prostate may be observed with abdominal 
radiographic examination ( Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b ). 
A neutrophilia with a left shift is a usual finding in dogs 
with acute prostatitis; however, the hemogram may be nor-
mal in chronic cases. Hematuria, pyuria, and bacteriuria are 
evident in urinalysis in dogs with either acute or chronic 
prostatitis ( Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b ). Prostatic fluid 
(collected either via ejaculation or prostatic wash) analysis 
will reveal numerous neutrophils with evidence of engulfed 
bacteria. In chronic prostatitis, the inflammatory compo -
nent may be reduced. Evaluation of prostatic fluid collected 
either via ejaculation or prostatic wash will show evidence 
of suppurative inflammation. The results of prostatic fluid 
cytology and culture generally correlate well with histology 
in clinical cases of prostatitis. However, tissue culture has 
been found more accurate in detecting prostatic infection 
(Smith, 2008).
2.2.4 Therapy
Prolonged antibiotic therapy is suggested for bacterial pros-
tatitis. The prostate is difficult to penetrate for many anti -
biotics because of pH differences in the blood versus the 
prostatic fluid, and lipid solubility and protein binding char-
acteristics of antibiotics. Antibiotics like chloramphenicol, 
erythromycin, trimethoprim, and fluoroquinolones, cipro -
floxacin, and enrofloxacin are lipid soluble antibiotics and 
should be chosen by culture and sensitivity of prostatic fluid 
and continued for 4–6 weeks (Memon, 2007; Johnston and 
Kustritz, 2001b; Smith, 2008). Follow-up evaluation of urine 
and prostatic fluid cultures is important prior to discontinu-
ance of therapy after 30 days to assure resolution of infec -
tion (Smith, 2008). If BPH is also present, castration along 
with medical management of prostatitis is recommended as 
the infection is more quickly controlled in castrated versus 
intact males (Memon, 2007; Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b). 
Initiating the antibiotics 5–7  days prior to castration will 
reduce the incidence of scirrhous cord. In valuable breeding 
dogs with prostatitis and concurrent BPH, castration may be

Diseases of the reproductive system of male dogs and cats  Chapter | 11  173
avoided and finasteride in addition to antibiotics should be 
given (Sirinarumitr et al., 2001). Prostatic abscesses can be 
life threatening and can result in septicemia, endotoxemia, 
and localized peritonitis. It should be considered a medical 
and surgical emergency, and requires rapid medical stabili-
zation by treating septicemia, shock, and surgical drainage 
(Wallace, 2001).
2.3 Prostatic cysts
Prostatic cysts are cavitating lesions with a distinct wall, 
containing clear to turbid fluid. They may be either within 
(retention/intraprostatic/true) or outside (para-prostatic) the 
prostatic parenchyma, classified as either true or retention 
cysts (intra-prostatic) and para-prostatic cysts ( Johnston 
and Kustritz, 2001b; Peter and Widmer, 2003).
Prostatic cysts (cystic prostatic disorder), commonly 
occur in older, large-breed dogs ( Johnston and Kustritz, 
2001b; Peter and Widmer, 2003 ). In cats, there are scarce 
reports of prostatic cysts, only a single case of the para-
prostatic cysts was reported in a 3-year-old neutered male 
domestic, short-haired cat with a history of pollakiuria 
(Palmieri et al., 2022). The origin of these cysts is obscure. 
Intra-prostatic cysts are hypothesized to be developed 
from the dilation of prostatic acini secondary to squamous 
metaplasia induced by endogenous or exogenous estrogen 
compounds. While, for para-prostatic, it is supposed that 
embryologic remnants of the female reproductive tract 
(Mullerian duct system or uterus masculinus) found in 
males become fluid-filled ( Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b ; 
Peter and Widmer, 2003 ). Intra-prostatic cysts often oc -
cur in association with BPH or other prostatic pathologies. 
Para-prostatic cysts are usually located near the prostate. 
These cysts are generally attached to the prostate via a stalk 
of tissue or adhesions. The para-prostatic cysts are often 
very large and can be palpated transabdominally ( Johnston 
and Kustritz, 2001b; Smith, 2008).
The clinical signs in prostatic cysts are like those ob -
served with other types of prostatic enlargements and gen -
erally become apparent only when the cyst reaches a size 
sufficient to cause pressure on adjacent organs. Associated 
symptoms may be tenderness, lethargy, dysuria, hematuria 
secondary to cyst hemorrhage, and straining during defe -
cation (due to compression of the rectum by a large cyst). 
Large cysts may result in abdominal distension ( Memon, 
2007; Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b).
Prostatic cysts are typically diagnosed by ultrasono -
graphic examination of the prostate and can be visualized 
as anechoic lesions. Prostatomegaly is visible on abdomi -
nal radiographs. Small cystic structures may not alter the 
prostate contour and are difficult to be diagnosed with tran-
srectal palpation. Very large para-prostatic cysts may be 
palpable on abdominal palpation but should be confirmed 
with ultrasonography. Prostatic cysts must be differentiated 
from the bladder and prostatic abscesses ( Memon, 2007 ; 
Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b ; Peter and Widmer, 2003 ; 
Smith, 2008).
Medical therapy for prostatic cysts has not been re -
ported. Surgical debridement, omentalization, marsupi -
alization, and placement of surgical drains have been the 
traditional therapies (Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b; Smith, 
2008). These therapies are often effective with some com -
plications. Ultrasound-guided drainage of cysts is also an 
acceptable method of treatment with the advantages of 
lower morbidity, lower costs, and improved outcome ver -
sus surgery (Boland et al., 2003 ). Castration or finasteride 
therapy to reduce prostate size is recommended before or 
concurrently with these other procedures ( Johnston and 
Kustritz, 2001b).
2.4 Prostatic neoplasia
Prostatic neoplasia is rare in dogs and approximately  
5%–7% of dogs with prostatic disease suffer from prostatic 
neoplasia. In cats, although prostatic disorders are extremely 
rare, prostatic carcinoma is the most reported prostatic le -
sion according to the literature available ( Palmieri et  al., 
2022). The most common neoplasm of the canine prostate 
is adenocarcinoma. However, other tumors like transitional 
cell carcinoma, leiomyosarcoma, and hemangiosarcoma 
have also been reported (Memon, 2007).
Prostatic adenocarcinoma commonly occurs in older 
intact and castrated dogs. Increased risk of carcinoma in 
castrated dogs has been reported (Teske et al., 2002; Bryan 
et  al., 2007 ). However, some believe, carcinoma of the 
prostate occurs with the same prevalence in sexually in -
tact and neutered dogs ( Shidaifat et al., 2007; Schrank and 
Romagnoli, 2020 ). Breed predisposition to prostatic ad -
enocarcinoma has not been reported, but generally, there is 
increased prevalence among medium- to large-sized dogs. 
Neoplastic changes in the prostate do not predispose dogs 
to other prostatic diseases ( Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b ). 
Prostatic carcinoma is androgen independent. It metasta -
sizes rapidly in ∼70%–80% of cases and the metastasis has 
been reported to regional lymph nodes, pelvic musculature, 
vertebral bodies, lung, liver, urethra and urinary bladder, co-
lon and rectum, spleen, heart, kidney, distant lymph nodes, 
and adrenal glands (Palmieri et al., 2022; Sun et al., 2017).
In most dogs, clinical signs are not apparent until late 
in the course of the disease, after the pressure is caused by 
increased prostate size and metastases. The most common 
presenting clinical signs are like other prostatic diseases 
that include prostatomegaly, painful abdominal palpa -
tion, stranguria, dysuria, hematuria, pyuria, constipation, 
tenesmus, anorexia, weight loss, pain and paresis of the 
hind limb (excluding those related to potential metasta -
ses) (Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b ; Palmieri et al., 2022 ). 
Metastasis to regional lymph nodes and pelvic bones is

174 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
commonly reflected in weight loss, emaciation, lumbar 
pain, and neurological deficits in the pelvic limbs ( Peter 
and Widmer, 2003; Smith, 2008).
On transrectal palpation, the gland is typically en -
larged and irregular which may be painful ( Memon, 2007; 
Smith, 2008). If a prostate is palpable on a transrectal exam 
in a castrated male, one should be suspicious of prostatic 
neoplasia ( Smith, 2008 ). Prostatomegaly, prostatic min -
eralization, regional lymphadenopathy, and evidence of 
metastasis to the lungs and skeleton may be visible on 
abdominal radiographs. Ultrasonographically, focal to dif -
fuse hyperechoic areas are seen in the neoplastic prostatic 
parenchyma. Prostatic contour is generally irregular and/or 
discontinuous (Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b; Smith, 2008). 
Leukocytosis and neutrophilia with a left shift have been 
reported with prostate adenocarcinoma. The most com -
mon serum chemistry profile changes in affected dogs in -
clude elevated alkaline phosphatase and hypoalbuminemia 
(Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b ; Peter and Widmer, 2003 ). 
Prostatic fluid may contain neoplastic prostatic cells, but for 
confirmatory diagnosis FNA or histopathologic examina -
tion of biopsy specimens is often necessary ( Johnston and 
Kustritz, 2001b; Peter and Widmer, 2003).
The prognosis for dogs with prostatic adenocarcinoma 
is grave, with a short survival life of 1–2 months after diag-
nosis (Memon, 2007). Prostatic tumors are often diagnosed 
after the development of clinical signs, and by this time, 
local or regional metastasis has already occurred ( Smith, 
2008). Euthanasia is often recommended after the diagnosis 
of prostatic neoplasia ( Memon, 2007 ; Peter and Widmer, 
2003). Treatment options for prostatic adenocarcinoma are 
limited. Surgical resection (prostatectomy) does not seem to 
be a good option for dogs, because it results in permanent 
urinary incontinence and high rates of morbidity and fail -
ure. Radiation therapy may improve the survival time, but 
local side effects such as colitis, urethritis, and cystitis make 
this option less acceptable. Chemotherapy may be a good 
option, but current protocols have limited success. In case 
of urethral obstruction, a cystostomy tube can be fixed to 
improve the life quality of the dog that is yet to debilitate by 
the disease ( Memon, 2007; Johnston and Kustritz, 2001b ; 
Peter and Widmer, 2003).
3 Diseases of penis and prepuce
3.1 Balanoposthitis
Balanoposthitis is inflammation of the glans penis (balani -
tis) and inflammation of the preputial mucosa (posthitis). 
The disease is common in dogs and rare in cats ( Johnston 
and Kustritz, 2001d,e ; Reeves and Thomas, 2003 ). Both 
prepuberal dogs and adult dogs are affected. No breed 
predisposition has been reported ( Johnston et  al., 2001 ). 
Etiological factors include allergies, trauma, foreign 
 objects,  micro-organism infection, neoplasia, urinary tract 
stones, and phimosis (Johnston and Kustritz, 2001d; Reeves 
and Thomas, 2003 ). The micro-organisms isolated from 
balanoposthitis generally are normal inhabitants of the pre-
puce. The most commonly isolated bacteria is E. coli; other 
bacteria include Pseudomonas aeruginosa, Streptococcus 
pyogenes, Staphylococcus aureus,  and Klebsiella sp. 
Mycoplasmas (more commonly) and ureaplasmas have 
been cultured from the prepuce of balanoposthitis-affected 
dogs. Canine herpesvirus (CHV) and calicivirus (rarely) 
(Johnston et  al., 2001 ; Reeves and Thomas, 2003 ) have 
been reported to be the viral causes of balanoposthitis in 
dogs. The most common sign of balanoposthitis is yellow-
green preputial discharge, varying from purulent to sangui-
nopurulent. The discharge may vary in volume and degree 
of purulence and may have a fetid odor (Nelson and Couto, 
2013). The penile skin and preputial mucosa may be nor -
mal, erythematous, or ulcerative; scanty to copious purulent 
material overlying the mucosa can be visible.
In chronic conditions, lymphoid follicles may be grossly 
visible. In viral balanoposthitis, vesicular or lymphoid nod-
ular lesions may be present ( Reeves and Thomas, 2003 ). 
Swelling of the prepuce and pain is rarely present except in 
cases of trauma or foreign objects. Diagnosis of the disease 
is usually done by visual or physical examination of the pe-
nis and prepuce. Sedation or anesthesia may be necessary 
for the complete extrusion of the penis. Bacterial and my -
coplasma cultures may be performed, but as most of them 
are normal inhabitants of the prepuce, the results may not be 
meaningful. Serologic testing or virus isolation can be per -
formed for the diagnosis of canine herpes virus ( Johnston 
and Kustritz, 2001d; Reeves and Thomas, 2003). Mild bala-
noposthitis may occur in many sexually mature dogs and 
resolves spontaneously without any treatment. Treatment 
includes correcting any predisposing factors, clipping long 
hair away from the opening of the prepuce, and thorough 
flushing of the preputial cavity with a mild antiseptic or 
sterile saline solution. In bacterial or mycoplasma infection, 
systemic and/or topical antibiotics can be prescribed as indi-
cated by culture and sensitivity tests (Johnston and Kustritz, 
2001d; Reeves and Thomas, 2003). Antihistamines or corti-
costeroids are suggested in balanoposthitis caused by atopic 
dermatitis (Johnston and Kustritz, 2001d).
3.2 Phimosis and paraphimosis
Phimosis is the inability of the male to protrude the penis 
from the prepuce ( Fig. 4 ). The condition has been rarely 
reported in dogs and cats (Johnston and Kustritz, 2001d,e). 
The condition occurs because of stenosis or stricture of 
the preputial opening and may be congenital or acquired 
(Papazoglou and Kazakos, 2002 ; Boothe, 2003 ). Trauma, 
cicatricial constriction after wound, preputial inflamma -
tion, preputial infection, and neoplasia are the common

Diseases of the reproductive system of male dogs and cats  Chapter | 11  175
acquired causes. In long-haired cats, preputial hairs en -
tangle the preputial opening and cause phimosis ( Reeves 
and Thomas, 2003 ). Clinical signs may include dysuria, 
hematuria, inability to copulate, or pain during erection. 
The treatment suggested is a surgical enlargement of the 
preputial orifice.
Paraphimosis is the inability to retract the erect or 
nonerect, protruded penis from the preputial sheath. 
Paraphimosis occurs commonly in dogs and is rare in cats 
(Johnston and Kustritz, 2001d,e). Clinical signs depend on 
the duration of the injury and severity. The penis may be 
normal or edematous, or in prolonged cases, the glans penis 
may be dry or excoriated, and in severe cases, penile gan -
grene may develop. The prescribed treatment is the replace-
ment of the penis after lubrication or surgical enlargement 
of the preputial orifice (Reeves and Thomas, 2003).
3.3 Priapism
A prolonged penile erection without sexual arousal is 
known as priapism or a persistent penile erection that leads 
to discomfort and difficult urination. Priapism is a very rare 
disorder in dogs and cats (Johnston and Kustritz, 2001d,e). 
The severe form may require surgical correction.
3.4 Penile neoplasia
Neoplasia of the penis is rare in dogs and extremely rare in 
cats (Johnston and Kustritz, 2001d,e ). The most common 
neoplasms are transmissible venereal tumors (TVTs) and 
squamous cell carcinomas in dogs ( Johnston and Kustritz, 
2001d; Reeves and Thomas, 2003). TVTs are transmissible 
tumors where neoplastic round cells are transferred from 
one to another host. TVTs are generally pink, nodular le -
sions, which vary in size and number. Large lesions usually 
have a cauliflower appearance (Reeves and Thomas, 2003). 
The lesions are often attached to the junction between the 
inner sheath of the prepuce and penile epithelium ( Foster, 
2012). Diagnosis of TVT can be made by physical examina-
tion, cytologic examination of swabs, imprint examination 
of tumors, and histologic evaluation (Purohit, 2008). TVTs 
are best treated with vincristine (0.025 mg/kg BW, slow I/V 
at 7 days interval, three treatments, or at least one treatment 
beyond resolution of clinical signs). However, spontaneous 
regression may occur within months of diagnosis. TVTs 
are immunogenic tumors; the host’s immune system plays 
a major role in inhibiting the growth and metastasis of the 
tumor (Ahuja et al., 2017 ). Surgical resection is the treat -
ment of choice for squamous cell carcinoma ( Foster, 2012; 
Reeves and Thomas, 2003).

176 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Diseases of the reproductive system of male dogs and cats  Chapter | 11  177

178 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Diseases of the reproductive system of male dogs and cats  Chapter | 11  179

181

Chapter 12
Autoimmune diseases of dogs and cats
Autoimmune diseases are relatively common. They occur 
in about 5% of humans and probably in a similar propor -
tion of domestic mammals. Most result from the emergence 
of clones of “rogue” lymphocytes directed against normal 
body components. The fact that they tend to develop late in 
life suggests that these diseases, like cancer, are probably 
the result of multiple random defects ( Bücheler and Giger, 
1993). Thus while one defect alone may be insufficient to 
permit an autoimmune response, multiple problems may 
eventually permit self-reactive lymphocytes to develop. 
Given the ubiquity of microbial and environmental antigens, 
lymphocytes are under constant pressure to proliferate. The 
presence of a constant supply of self-antigens is especially 
significant. Much of the complexity of the immune system 
is determined by the need to keep this lymphocyte prolif -
eration in check. Lymphocyte proliferation is regulated by 
multiple mechanisms ( Baier et  al., 1995 ). These include 
negative selection within the thymus, the requirement for 
multiple co-stimulatory signals, lymphocyte cooperation, 
and the activities of regulatory cell populations. These regu-
latory mechanisms often overlap so that the development of 
self-reactive rogue clones does not occur suddenly. It likely 
takes multiple accumulated defects, acting collectively in 
regulatory pathways, to lead to the loss of control of lym -
phocyte proliferation (Aasted et al., 1988).
By evolving receptor systems that can bind to as many 
microbial antigens as possible, vertebrates also developed 
the potential for self-destruction. The random generation of 
antigen-binding receptors ensures that many lymphocytes 
are produced with receptors that can bind self-antigens 
(Ackley and Cooper, 1992 ). It has been estimated that as 
many as 50% of newly produced T cells and B cells may bind 
self-antigens with high affinity. These self-reactive cells are 
usually rigorously suppressed so that only a few animals de-
velop autoimmune diseases (Ackley et al., 1990). However, 
the reasons why these individuals eventually develop auto-
immune diseases while others do not are still unclear. Many 
factors influence susceptibility to autoimmunity.
These include sex and age, genetic background, micro -
biota, and virus infections. We also know that the develop-
ment of autoantibodies is a relatively common event that 
by itself does not inevitably lead to autoimmune disease. 
Indeed, some autoantibodies serve a physiological function 
(Anderson et al., 1983).
Because we do not know precisely what triggers autoim-
munity, this chapter reviews some of the many different pre-
disposing factors that have been identified or proposed as 
well as the mechanisms by which autoimmunity causes tis-
sue damage and disease. As with other immune functions, 
both B and T cells can mediate autoimmunity (Baker et al., 
1959). Thus in some autoimmune diseases, the disease is 
mediated by autoantibodies alone. In others, the damage 
may be mediated by T cells alone or by some combination 
of autoantibodies and T cells (Bendinelli et al., 1995).
1 Induction of autoimmunity
Autoimmune diseases appear to develop spontaneously, 
and predisposing causes are rarely obvious. Nevertheless, 
they fall into two major categories: they can result from 
a normal immune response to an unusual or abnormal 
antigen, or they can result from an abnormal immune 
response to a normal antigen ( Fig.  1). The second cat -
egory is probably the most common. In these cases, the 
mechanisms that normally prevent the development of 
self responsive and B cells fail ( Barlough et  al., 1981 ). 
Many different environmental factors and genes contrib -
ute to this failure, and the failure may not always be com -
plete. Autoimmune diseases may result from an aberrant  
response to a single specific antigen; alternatively, they 
may be due to a general defect in the regulation of B or 
T cell functions ( Bezuidenhout, 1993 ).
2 Normal immune responses
Many autoimmune responses simply reflect a normal im -
mune response to an antigen that has been previously hidden 
or result from cross reactivity between an infectious agent 
and normal body components. Many naturally occurring 
autoantibodies play a role in homeostasis and regulation.

182 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
They are usually low-titer, low affinity IgM or IgG antibod-
ies directed against protein fragments, or proteins damaged 
by oxidation or enzymes (Bishop et al., 1992).
2.1 Antigens hidden in cells or tissues (cryptic 
antigens)
Many autoimmune responses are triggered when non-  
tolerant T cells meet previously hidden autoantigens. After 
all, T cells can only be made tolerant to autoantigens if they 
are exposed to them ( Bishop et al., 1992 ). There are many 
autoantigens that do not induce tolerance simply because 
they remain hidden within cells or tissues and do not nor -
mally encounter T cells. Although the control of the immune 
system requires that most self-reactive cells be eliminated, 
one should not assume that all autoimmune responses are 
bad or even cause disease. Some autoimmune responses 
have physiological functions. For example, red blood cells 
must be removed from the blood once they reach the end of 
their life span (Bland, 1988). This process is accomplished 
by autoantibodies. As red cells age, an anion transport pro-
tein called CD233 (or band 3 protein) is gradually oxidized, 
and a new epitope is generated. This new epitope is recog -
nized by IgG autoantibodies (Yuhki and O'Brien, 1988).
These autoantibodies bind to aged red cells and trigger 
their phagocytosis by splenic macrophages. CD233 is found 
in many cell-types, and it may be that its exposure on aged 
cells and their subsequent removal is a major cell elimina -
tion pathway (Zaccaro et al., 1995).
Many autoantigens are found in places where they 
never encounter circulating lymphocytes. For example, in 
the testes, new antigens may only appear at puberty, long 
after the T cell system has developed and become tolerant 
to autoantigens. Injury to the testes may permit proteins 
from damaged tissues to reach the bloodstream, encounter 
antigen-sensitive cells, and stimulate autoimmunity. Hidden 
antigens may also be found within cells. For example, after 
a heart attack, autoantibodies may be produced against the 
mitochondria of cardiac muscle cells. In chronichepatitis in 
dogs, animals develop antibodies to liver membrane pro -
teins. In diseases such as trypanosomiasis or tuberculosis 
in which widespread tissue damage occurs, autoantibodies 
to many different tissue antigens may be detected in serum 
(Zeidner et al., 1993).
2.2 Antigens generated by molecular changes
The production of some autoantibodies may be triggered by 
the development of new epitopes on normal proteins. Two 
examples of autoantibodies generated in this way are rheu -
matoid factors (RFs) and immunoconglutinins (IKs, after 
the German spelling).
RFs are autoantibodies directed against other immu -
noglobulins. When an antibody binds to an antigen, the 
shape of the immunoglobulin molecule changes in such a 
way that new epitopes are exposed on its Fc region ( Blum 
et al., 1985). These new epitopes may stimulate RF forma -
tion. RFs are produced in diseases in which large amounts 
of immune complexes are generated. These include the au-
toimmune disease of joints called rheumatoid arthritis and 
systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE), in which B cells re -
spond to many different autoantigens.
IKs are autoantibodies directed against the complement 
components C2, C4, and especially C3. The epitopes that 
FIG. 1 A simplified scheme for the pathogenesis of autoimmune diseases.

Autoimmune diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 12  183
stimulate IK formation are exposed when these complement 
components are activated (Bradley et al., 1993). The level of 
IKs in serum reflects the amount of complement activation; 
this, in turn, is a measure of the antigenic stimulation to 
which an animal is subjected. IK levels are thus nonspecific 
indicators of the prevalence of infectious disease within an 
animal population (Bravo et al., 1996). Their physiological 
role is unclear, but they may enhance complement-mediated 
opsonization.
2.3 Receptor editing
Both B and T cell antigen receptors are generated by ran -
dom gene rearrangement. This process inevitably results in 
the generation of both nonfunctional and autoreactive anti -
gen receptors. Once a complete antigen receptor is formed, 
however, rearrangement of the cell’s receptor genes con -
tinues ( Breitschwerdt et  al., 1987 ). Thus if an immature 
B cell produces a receptor that binds to a self-antigen, the 
continuing development of that B cell is blocked while its 
light chain receptor chains continue to undergo recombina-
tion. This replacement of one light chain by another lead 
to changes in receptor specificity and eventually makes the 
cells no longer autoreactive. Receptor editing only occurs 
in immature B cells. Mature B cells that bind autoantigens 
do not undergo receptor editing but rather are triggered to 
undergo apoptosis (Brown et al., 1995).
3 Abnormal immune responses
3.1 Failure of regulatory control
Although autoimmunity may be triggered by hidden auto -
antigens, a sustained autoimmune response is necessary for 
the disease to develop. This may result from a failure of the 
normal control mechanisms of the immune system and can 
be demonstrated simply by injecting mice with rat red blood 
cells. Following such an injection, mice not only make an -
tibodies to the rat cells but also develop a self-limited and 
transient autoimmune response to their own red blood cells. 
This autoimmune response is rapidly controlled by regula -
tory cells and lasts for only a few days. If, however, regu -
latory cell activity in these mice is impaired, as occurs in 
New Zealand Black (NZB) mice, for example, these auto -
antibodies will persist to cause red blood cell destruction 
and anemia. It is common to find autoimmune diseases as -
sociated with lymphoid tumors. For example, myasthenia 
gravis, an autoimmune disease involving the neuromuscular 
junction, is commonly associated with the presence of thy -
mic carcinoma. In humans, there is a fourfold increase in 
the incidence of rheumatoid arthritis in patients with malig-
nant lymphoid tumors, and there is evidence of a similar as-
sociation in other mammals. Since many lymphoid tumors 
result from a failure in immunological control mechanisms, 
a simultaneous failure in self-tolerance may also occur.
Alternatively, some lymphoid tumors may consist of 
cells producing autoantibodies. It is also possible that 
some lymphoid tumors may develop as a result of pro -
longed stimulation of the immune system by auto anti -
gens. Potentially harmful, self-reactive lymphocytes are 
normally destroyed in the thymus by apoptosis triggered 
through CD95. Defects in CD95 or its ligand CD95L 
(CD178) cause autoimmunity by permitting abnormal  
T cells to survive. This is well demonstrated in the lpr 
strain of mice. These animals have a mutation that alters 
the structure of the intracellular domain of CD95 and 
blocks its functions. A mutation (called gld) in CD95L has 
a similar effect ( Bartholomew et al., 1978 ). Both lpr and 
gld mice develop multiple autoimmune lesions accom -
panied by lymphoproliferation. The autoimmune regula -
tor ( aire) gene regulates T cell development and permits 
thymic epithelial cells to express multiple self-antigens. 
T cells that respond to these self-antigens are eliminated. 
Thus humans with a defective aire gene develop autoim -
mune diseases involving multiple endocrine organs and 
the skin (Barta and Hubbert, 1978 ).
3.2 Infection-induced autoimmunity
Autoimmune diseases are triggered by many environmental 
factors, and infectious agents are among the most important. 
Given, however, that infections are very common and auto-
immune diseases fairly rare, they clearly cannot account for 
the entire autoimmune process. For example, mice infected 
with certain reoviruses develop an autoimmune polyendo -
crine disease characterized by diabetes mellitus and retarded 
growth. These reovirus-infected mice make autoantibodies 
against normal pituitary, pancreas, gastric mucosa, nuclei, 
glucagon, growth hormone, and insulin. Likewise, in NZB 
mice, persistent infection with a type C retrovirus leads to 
the production of autoantibodies against nucleic acids and 
red blood cells. Bacteria such as Streptococcus pyogenes, 
Borrelia burgdorferi, and Leptospira interrogans may trig-
ger autoimmune heart disease, arthritis, and uveitis, respec-
tively. The protozoan parasite Trypanosoma cruzi triggers 
an autoimmune cardiomyopathy.
The situation with spontaneous autoimmune disease is 
less clear.
Many attempts have been made to isolate viruses from 
patients with autoimmune diseases but with mixed results. 
For example, SLE in dogs and humans has been associ -
ated with either a type C retrovirus or paramyxovirus infec-
tion. Small quantities of the Epstein-Barr virus genome can 
be found in the salivary glands of humans with Sjögren’s 
syndrome. Moreover, epidemiological evidence points 
to some form of a viral trigger for diseases such as mul -
tiple sclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis, and insulin-dependent 
diabetes mellitus in children. Just how viruses can induce 
autoimmunity is unclear, but three major mechanisms are

184 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
recognized: molecular mimicry, epitope spreading, and by-
stander activation (Belz and Heath, 1995a, b).
3.2.1 Molecular mimicry
Autoimmunity may result from molecular mimicry, a term 
used to describe the sharing of epitopes between an infec -
tious agent or parasite and an autoantigen ( Fig. 2). B cells 
may be triggered by a foreign epitope that cross-reacts with 
an autoantigen. However, they will only respond to this epi-
tope if they receive T cell help. If nearby Th cells also rec -
ognize these microbial epitopes as foreign, they may trigger 
a B cell response that results in the production of autoan -
tibodies. Once a B cell response is triggered in this way, 
the infectious agent may be removed while the autoimmune 
response continues—a “hit-and-run” process.
Many examples of molecular mimicry are now recog -
nized. For example, the parasite T. cruzi contains antigens 
that cross-react with mammalian neurons and cardiac muscle. 
Individuals infected with T. cruzi make autoantibodies that can 
cause nervous system and heart disease. Molecular mimicry 
may also cause the heart lesions of rheumatic fever in children. 
Antibodies to the cell wall M-protein of group A streptococci 
cross-react with cardiac myosin. Children infected with certain 
strains of group A streptococci produce antimyocardial anti-
bodies and develop heart disease. Some strains of streptococci 
may cause acute glomerulonephritis in children as a result of 
the production of antibodies cross- reacting with glomerular 
basement membranes. Other examples of molecular mimicry 
include the Epstein-Barr virus DNA polymerase, which cross-
reacts with myelin basic protein and may be involved in the in-
duction of multiple sclerosis, and the poliovirus capsid protein 
VP2, which cross-reacts with the acetylcholine receptor and 
may induce myasthenia gravis.
The integrin CD11a/18 (LFA-1) shares an antigenic de-
terminant with the outer surface protein of the Lyme dis -
ease bacterium, B. burgdorferi. Patients infected with this 
organism mount an initial immune response that may then 
develop into autoimmunity. In about 10% of patients with 
Lyme arthritis, antibiotics fail to resolve the disease, sug -
gesting that, once triggered, the autoimmune the process 
can proceed in the absence of the bacterium.
Antibodies against microbial heat-shock proteins are 
found in the serum of humans and rats with rheumatoid ar -
thritis, ankylosing spondylitis, and SLE. Injection of killed 
Mycobacterium tuberculosis in Freund’s complete adjuvant 
can cause arthritis in rats, and T cells from these animals 
can transfer arthritis to normal syngeneic recipients. These 
T cells are responding to HSP 60, a mycobacterial heat-
shock protein. It has been suggested that molecular mimicry 
between microbial and mammalian HSP 60 may be impor -
tant in rheumatoid arthritis.
Ankylosing spondylitis is an autoimmune arthritis of 
humans that affects the sacroiliac joints, spine, and pe -
ripheral joints. Patients also develop acute anterior uveitis 
(inflammation of the iris and neighboring structures in the 
eye). More than 95% of humans with ankylosing spondy -
litis possess the MHC class I allele HLA-B27, whereas, 
in the normal population, the prevalence of this allele is 
less than 8%. The disease results from molecular mimicry 
between the hypervariable region of HLA-B27 and anti -
gens found in Klebsiella pneumoniae and related bacteria.  
K. pneumoniae is found more frequently than normal in the 
intestine of patients with active ankylosing spondylitis and 
uveitis, and patients with active disease have elevated lev -
els of IgA against Klebsiella in their sera. Cloning of B27 
into mice and subsequent infection of these animals with  
FIG. 2 Cross-reactions with foreign antigens may be sufficient to trigger a helper T cell population that will promote an autoimmune response by B cells. 
A helper effect triggered by a foreign antigen may inadvertently permit an autoimmune response to occur.

Autoimmune diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 12  185
K. pneumoniae  causes acute spondylitis. HLA-B27-
associated with ankylosing spondylitis has been described 
in gorillas. Up to 20% of wild gorillas may have spondy -
litis, and the disease has also been described in a gibbon, 
baboons, and in rhesus macaques.
In porcine enzootic pneumonia caused by Mycoplasma 
hyopneumoniae, antibodies to the mycoplasma cross-react 
with piglungs, and in contagious bovine pleuropneumonia, 
there is cross reactivity between Mycoplasma mycoides  
antigens and normal bovine lung. It is not known to what 
extent these autoantibodies contribute to the pathogenesis 
of these diseases. There is a clearer causal relationship be -
tween Leptospira interrogans  infection and the develop -
ment of periodic ophthalmia, the leading cause of blindness 
in horses.
Some microbial superantigens may also trigger autoim-
munity. The superantigen staphylococcal enterotoxin B ac-
tivates the same T cells that react with myelin and induces 
autoimmune encephalitis. It has been suggested that a bac -
terial superantigen may trigger rheumatoid arthritis since 
the T cells in affected joints are enriched in cells bearing 
specific TCR V domains. The only known agents that can 
alter V region gene expression in this way are superantigens.
3.2.2 Epitope spreading
In some cases, autoimmunity seems to result from a nor -
mal immune response against a foreign antigen that sub -
sequently “spreads” to recognize self-antigens. When an 
immune response is initiated, the immune response is first 
directed against a single epitope on the inciting antigen. 
However, as the process continues and B cell receptors di -
versify, and responses begin to be directed against additional 
epitopes. At first, they will react with other epitopes on the 
same protein. Eventually, responses may spread to epitopes 
on autoantigens. Epitope spreading has been demonstrated 
in diseases such as thyrotoxicosis and diabetes mellitus and 
may account for some of the difficulties encountered in con-
trolling these diseases.
3.2.3 Bystander activation
When viruses destroy cells, previously hidden antigens may 
be released. These may activate nearby lymphocytes that 
had not been involved in the antiviral response. Additionally,  
T cells might, in responding to an antigen, produce a mixture 
of cytokines such as the tumor necrosis factors and nitric 
oxide, that can kill nearby cells and trigger an autoimmune 
response. Viruses may induce an inflammatory response that 
results in the release of multiple cytokines. Pathogens may trig-
ger inappropriate lymphocyte proliferation by acting through 
pattern-recognition receptors to generate co-stimulatory mol-
ecules and proinflammatory mediators.
These cytokines may activate previously dormant T 
cells. As a result, the T cells may attack autoantigens that 
they previously ignored. Evidence suggests that Coxsackie 
virus-induced diabetes mellitus is mediated in large part 
through bystander activation. Prolonged infection with 
some viruses may induce autoimmunity as a result of 
chronic activation of the immune responses. Thus a pro -
longed polyclonal B cell activation may result in the even -
tual emergence of autoreactive clones (Fig. 3).
FIG. 3 Viruses may trigger autoimmune responses either by molecular mimicry or by stander activation.

186 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
3.3 Microchimerism
During pregnancy, mothers and their fetuses may exchange 
a few cells. Some of these fetal cells may persist in a moth-
er’s body for many years after pregnancy. Conversely, a 
mother’s cells may survive for many years in her offspring. 
These cells are accepted by a tolerant immune system. The 
process is called fetal microchimerism, and it has been sug-
gested that these persistent cells may be the cause of some 
autoimmune diseases. In women with the autoimmune 
disease scleroderma, it is possible to find fetal T, B, and 
natural killer (NK) cells, as well as fetal monocytes, in their 
blood. It has been suggested, therefore, that scleroderma is 
a form of graft-vs-host disease in these patients. Transfer of 
cells from the mother to her fetus may also cause autoim -
munity. For example, small numbers of maternal cells can 
be detected in the blood of most boys with the autoimmune 
disease dermatomyositis. In all these cases, the number of 
persistent foreign cells is so small that they cannot be the 
sole cause of the autoimmune disease.
4 Predisposing factors
4.1 Genetic predisposition
Although viruses or other infectious agents may trigger 
autoimmunity, it is clear that not all infected individuals 
develop autoimmune disease. This is because genetic fac -
tors are key determinants of disease susceptibility. Genome-
wide association studies have identified hundreds of loci that 
harbor risk factors for autoimmune diseases. Many of these 
are shared by multiple diseases and perhaps identify certain 
common pathways (such as JAK-STAT pathways) acting in 
multiple diseases. It is clear from these studies, however, 
that the associations so far identified do not account for all 
genetic effects, and the effect size at any individual locus is 
very small. In mice, at least 25 loci that contribute to auto -
immunity if deleted or over expressed have been identified. 
These include genes that code for cytokines, cytokine re -
ceptors, co-stimulators, molecules that regulate apoptosis, 
molecules that regulate antigen clearance, and members of 
cytokine or antigen-signaling cascades. Some diseases result 
from a defect in a single gene such as the lpr or gld muta-
tions. Their gene products play a key role in the destruction 
of self-reactive T cells. In their absence, excessive T cell 
proliferation and autoimmunity result. Others result from 
inherited complement deficiencies. More commonly, the 
role of genes is complex. Thus genes influence the severity 
of disease, and no specific gene is necessary or sufficient for 
disease expression. Even if an animal has a complete set of 
susceptibility alleles at multiple loci, the presence of overt 
disease may depend on the genetic background of the ani -
mal. This genetic complexity probably also contributes to 
differences in disease presentation since these may be deter-
mined by different sets of contributing genes. Genetic anal-
ysis is also complicated because susceptibility genes may 
or may not interact with each other. The vulnerability of a 
target organ to autoimmune damage may also be inherited. 
The genes that are most commonly associated with natu -
rally occurring autoimmune diseases are those in the MHC. 
MHC molecules regulate the presentation of processed 
epitopes. In theory, therefore, they determine resistance or 
susceptibility to many diseases. In practice, there is strong 
selection against genes that predispose to susceptibility to 
infectious agents, and MHC genes have been selected for a 
strong response to most common infectious pathogens. In 
contrast, MHC genes causing autoimmune diseases in old, 
post-reproductive animals do not offer a selective disadvan-
tage, and MHC-linked predispositions have been identified. 
Studies of humans have shown that almost all autoimmune 
diseases are linked to multiple MHC loci. Presumably, an 
essential prerequisite for any autoimmune disease is that 
the autoantigen is appropriately processed and presented on 
an MHC molecule. Thus the structure of the MHC antigen-
binding groove determines whether a specific autoantigen 
will trigger an immune response. Some MHC alleles appear 
to protect against autoimmunity, and any predisposition to 
autoimmunity may be the result of the net effect of both 
enhancing and protective genes. In addition, most autoim -
mune diseases are associated with multiple MHC alleles. 
For example, in humans, the combination of HLA-A1, -B8, 
and -DR3 is associated with increased risk for type I dia -
betes, myasthenia gravis, and SLE. One possible reason 
for the increased predisposition of females to develop au -
toimmune diseases may be attributed to TLR7. This gene 
is located on the X-chromosome so that females have two 
copies while males only have one. TLR7 is closely linked to 
the development of systemic lupus.
4.1.1 The effects of spaying or neutering  
on autoimmune diseases in dogs
Sex hormones have significant effects on immune function, 
and it is unsurprising therefore that they affect the development 
of autoimmune diseases. In veterinary medicine, we have four 
distinct “genders” to assess: intact and neutered males and intact 
and spayed females. The relationship between spay/neutering 
and the development of autoimmune disease has been investi-
gated in a population of over 90,000 dogs. Compared to intact 
dogs, spayed, or neutered dogs had a significantly greater risk 
of hypoadrenocorticism, hypothyroidism, immune- mediated 
hemolytic anemia, and thrombocytopenia. Spayed females 
were at greater risk than neutered males for hypothyroidism 
and thrombocytopenia. Spayed females had a greater risk of 
developing systemic lupus erythematosus than intact females. 
There was no significant difference in risk between neutered 
and intact dogs for immune-mediated polyarthritis, myasthe-
nia gravis, or the pemphigus complex. Veterinarians should be 
aware of these increased risks.

Autoimmune diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 12  187
Neutering is associated with increased life expectancy but 
neutered and spayed dogs do have an increased risk of devel-
oping several autoimmune diseases (Sundburg et al., 2016).
4.2 Breed predispositions
Dogs have undergone two major population bottlenecks. 
The first occurred when they were domesticated about 
20,000 years ago. The second occurred about 200 years ago 
when most current dog breeds were created. Breeds have 
been developed as a result of aggressive phenotypic selec -
tion, in many cases resulting in inbreeding and a lack of ge-
netic diversity. This has had two effects. First, it has permitted 
deleterious autosomal recessive genes to be expressed, as is 
seen in the increased prevalence of immunodeficiency syn-
dromes and other immunological disorders. Second, it has 
resulted in a loss of MHC polymorphism. For example, 
DRB1*04 is found in most Boxers, DRB1*2401 may be re-
stricted to Akitas, DRB1*01 predominates in West Highland 
White Terriers, DQA*0203 is restricted to Dobermans, there 
is a high incidence of DQA*0102 in Irish Wolfhounds and 
Chows, and DRB1*0101 is common in Irish Setters. These 
limited haplotypes ensure that the dogs in these breeds will 
respond to an unusually narrow range of antigens, thus re -
ducing their resistance to infectious agents. Such dogs will 
also be more susceptible to immunological diseases.
The three major classes of immunologically mediated 
disease (autoimmunity, immunodeficiency, and atopy) tend 
to be encountered in some dog breeds more commonly than 
in others.
Old English Sheepdogs are unusually prone to develop 
autoimmune blood diseases. Certain autoimmune diseases, 
such as polyarteritis nodosa and hypothyroidism, have fa -
milial associations. Many dogs, especially those from rare 
breeds with small populations, have restricted MHC poly -
morphisms that can increase autoimmune disease suscep -
tibility. In dogs, there are several recognized associations 
between autoimmunity and MHC alleles. Diabetes mellitus 
is associated with DLA-A3, -A7, -A10, and -B4; antinu -
clear antibody production is associated with DLA-12; SLE 
is associated with DLA-A7; and autoimmune polyarthritis 
is associated with certain C4 alleles. Possession of an allele 
of DLA-79 (DLA-79*001:02) is associated with multiple 
immune-mediated diseases (hemolytic anemia, thrombocy-
topenia, polyarthritis, and atopic dermatitis).
Inbred lines of other animals have been produced that are 
associated with spontaneous development of autoimmune 
disease. For example, inbred NZB mice spontaneously de -
velop a syndrome that bears a striking resemblance to SLE. 
These mice develop immune complex glomerulonephritis. 
They become hypergammaglobulinemic and hypocomple -
mentemic, and they develop an autoimmune hemolytic 
anemia. Some also develop lymphoid tumors. NZB mice 
produce autoantibodies against nuclear antigens, red blood 
cells, and T cells, and their B cells are polyclonally activated. 
New Zealand White (NZW) mice are phenotypically normal, 
but the F1 cross between NZW and NZB mice has an even 
more severe SLE-like syndrome. In these animals, kidney 
disease is severe and is associated with high titers of antibod-
ies to nucleic acids. Studies on the inheritance of these traits 
in mice suggest that they are controlled by a small number 
of unlinked major genes and a large number of minor genes.
4.3 Intestinal microbiota
It is now well accepted that the intestinal microbiota both 
contribute to local host defenses and modulate systemic im-
mune responses. Nutrients and microbial components are 
continually released into the body where they influence im-
mune cell function.
In critically ill animals, breakdown of the intestinal epi-
thelium and mucosal barriers may permit excessive leakage 
of bacterial components into the body. Conversely, deple -
tion of the gut microbiome, especially as a result of antibi -
otic treatment, may make the mucosal defenses vulnerable 
and perhaps reduce the priming of the systemic immune 
responses. Because the gut microbiota influences the de -
velopment of immunological tolerance, dysbiosis may also 
affect the development of autoimmune disease.
Nonobese diabetic (NOD) mice develop spontaneous 
insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM) associated 
with infiltration of the pancreatic islets by lymphocytes. 
Their disease resembles human type 1 diabetes. The de -
velopment of diabetes in these mice is influenced by their 
microbiota. Thus conventional NOD mice that lack MyD88 
protein (MyD88 is an adaptor molecule for the Toll-like 
receptors) do not develop diabetes, whereas totally germ-
free MyD88 − NOD mice do. If commensal bacteria are 
given to these germ-free mice, their diabetes is less severe. 
Somehow the interaction of the intestinal microbiota with 
the immune system influences the predisposition of these 
mice to develop diabetes.
Alterations in the intestinal microbiota also influence 
autoimmune diseases such as rheumatoid arthritis, ankylos-
ing spondylitis, IDDM, and experimental autoimmune en -
cephalitis. In some mouse arthritis models, changes in the 
gut microbiota due to antibiotic treatment can exacerbate 
the disease.
Antinuclear antibody production in mice is influenced 
by the microbiota, especially by increased colonization 
with segmented filamentous bacteria.
5 Mechanisms of tissue damage  
in autoimmunity
Autoimmune disease results when tissues are damaged by 
autoreactive T cells or antibodies. This damage is a result of 
hypersensitivity reactions. However, multiple mechanisms

188 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
may be acting together in any such disease, and these may 
vary with time.
5.1 Type I hypersensitivity
Milk allergy in cattle is an autoimmune disease in which a 
milk protein ( α casein), normally found only in the udder, 
gains access to the general circulation and stimulates an im-
mune response. This happens when milking is delayed and 
intramammary pressure forces the α casein into the circula-
tion. For unknown reasons, this triggers a Th 2 response and 
IgE autoantibodies are produced. As a result, affected cows 
may develop acute anaphylaxis. A similar condition is seen 
occasionally in other domestic mammals such as the mare. 
Although antibodies in milk proteins are commonly found 
in human serum after rapid weaning, type I hypersensitivity 
is not a usual sequel.
5.2 Type II hypersensitivity
Autoantibodies may cause cell lysis with the assistance of 
complement or cytotoxic cells. Thus if autoantibodies are 
directed against red blood cells, autoimmune hemolytic 
anemia may result; if directed against platelets, thrombo -
cytopenia will occur; and if against thyroid cells, thyroiditis 
will result. In one form of this process in humans, autoan -
tibodies against thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) recep-
tors on thyroid cells stimulate thyroid activity rather than its 
destruction. Cell surface receptors are common targets of 
autoimmune attacks. In addition to the TSH receptor, auto-
antibodies attack the acetylcholine receptor in myasthenia 
gravis and the insulin receptor in some forms of diabetes. 
Autoantibodies to β-adrenoceptors have been detected in 
some patients with asthma. By blocking β-receptors, these 
antibodies make the airways highly irritable, and affected 
individuals develop severe asthma.
5.3 Type III hypersensitivity
Autoantibodies form immune complexes with autoantigens, 
and these complexes may cause inflammation. This is most 
significant in systemic lupus erythematosus, a disease in 
which many different autoantibodies are produced. Immune 
complexes deposited in glomeruli provoke a membranop -
roliferative glomerulonephritis. Similarly, in rheumatoid 
arthritis, immune complexes are deposited in joints and 
contribute to the local inflammatory response.
5.4 Type IV hypersensitivity
Many autoimmune disease lesions are infiltrated with 
mononuclear cells, and T cells probably contribute to their 
pathogenesis. Cytotoxic T cells cause demyelination in 
experimental allergic encephalitis and multiple sclerosis. 
Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus may be due to a T cell-
mediated response because the diseased pancreatic islets 
may be infiltrated by lymphocytes.
Lymphocytes from diabetics may be cytotoxic for pan -
creatic islet cells in vitro. Although cytotoxic T cells can kill 
cells directly.
Cytokines may also cause tissue damage. For example, 
TNF-αupregulates cell adhesion molecules, including se -
lectins, facilitating the migration of neutrophils into the 
lesions.
6 Autoimmunity and autoimmune 
disease in dogs and cats
Antithyroglobulin autoantibody autoimmune thyroiditis 
(lymphocytic thyroiditis) is a relatively common canine dis-
ease that mimics human Hashimoto’s thyroiditis. Although 
hypothyroidism is largely due to cell-mediated destruction 
of thyroid tissue, a range of serum autoantibodies to compo-
nents of the colloid are also identified and provide a useful 
diagnostic tool. The most widely available assay is that for 
detection of autoantibodies specific for thyroglobulin (Tg). 
Tg autoantibodies are most readily identified by an ELISA. 
The wells of microtiter trays are first coated with puri -
fied canine Tg. Appropriately diluted patient serum is then 
added and if autoantibody is present, it will bind to the Tg. 
This reaction must be visualized by a secondary antiserum 
(e.g., anti-dog IgG) conjugated to an enzyme such as alka -
line phosphatase (ALP). The addition of substrate will lead 
to a color change in positive wells, which may be measured 
spectrophotometrically.
6.1 Dog autoimmune disease
The following diseases represent those with a documented 
or suspected autoimmune origin and do not include the 
many other immune-mediated diseases that have been de -
scribed in the dog. For most of these diseases in the dog, the 
immunoregulatory abnormalities and mechanisms of im -
mune dysfunction have not been studied. The clinical and 
immunological characteristics of the following autoimmune 
diseases have been the subject of recent reviews.
6.2 Rheumatoid arthritis (RA)
Canine RA is a progressive, bilaterally symmetrical, ero -
sive polyarthritis. The disease affects young to middle aged 
dogs and primarily occurs in small and toy breeds. The joint 
changes observed in canine RA are very similar to those 
seen in human RA. As in human RA, the autoantibody, 
rheumatoid factor (RF), involved in canine RA is directed 
against autologous IgG. The pathogenesis of canine RA has 
not been studied in detail, but it is most likely similar to that 
of human RA. The histopathological findings in canine RA

Autoimmune diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 12  189
include the presence of synovial hyperplasia, fibrinous de -
posits, subchondral bone erosions, and a marked mononu -
clear cell infiltrate. In many dogs, the synovial membranes 
exhibit a diffuse T cell infiltrate adjacent to focal aggregates 
of B cells. Although there are many clinical and histopatho-
logical similarities between human and canine RA, there 
are several differences. Canine RF is usually an IgG anti -
body rather than an IgM antibody; features of systemic RA 
that often accompany joint disease in humans are not seen 
in the dog, and rheumatoid nodules which occur subcutane-
ously in people with RA have not been reported in the dog.
Although the stimulus that initiates RA in susceptible 
animals has not been determined, most theories implicate 
an infectious agent. Canine distemper virus has been sug -
gested as playing a role in the pathogenesis of canine RA. 
Dogs with RA have been shown to have antibodies to ca -
nine distemper virus in their synovial fluids and these anti -
bodies are not found in dogs with osteoarthritis.
Immune complexes precipitated from the synovial fluid 
of dogs with RA have been shown to contain canine dis -
temper virus by Western blotting Sjögren’s syndrome rep -
resents a triad of keratoconjunctivitis sicca, xerostomia, and 
the presence of connective tissue disease such as rheuma -
toid arthritis or systemic lupus erythematosus. Sjögren’s 
syndrome was originally identified in a colony of dogs 
with SLE, and subsequently in the general dog population. 
Affected dogs develop antibodies to the epithelial cells of 
the nictitating membrane, and to the lacrimal and salivary 
glands which leads to conjunctival dryness (keratoconjunc-
tivitis sicca) and mouth dryness (xerostomia). In a recent 
study of 50 affected dogs, 40% had evidence of rheumatoid 
factor and 42% had antinuclear antibodies. Histological ex-
amination of affected lacrimal and salivary glands showed 
extensive infiltration with lymphocytes and monocytes.
6.3 Systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE)
Canine SLE is a generalized immune complex disease that 
has clinical features similar to human SLE, including fe -
ver, polyarthritis, glomerulonephritis, and mucocutaneous 
lesions. As in humans, canine SLE is a chronic disease with 
alternating subacute periods and relapses. The pathogenesis 
of canine SLE is typical of a systemic immune complex dis-
ease with circulating immune complexes being deposited in 
the synovia of joints, producing a polyarthritis, in the glom-
eruli of the kidney, producing a glomerulonephritis, and at 
the basement membrane of the skin, producing dermatitis.
Plasma cell tumors; Unknown B cells Clonal expan -
sion and selection of transformed lymphocytes that may be 
related to aberrant expression of oncogenes or deletion of 
tumor suppressor genes. Unknown possible insertion of ret-
rovirus near oncogene sequence or disruption of tumor sup-
pressor gene expression. Clonal expansion of transformed 
monocyte. Tissues involved are generally those where there 
are resident macrophages: lung, skin, lymph node, spleen, 
and CNS are common sites.
Clonal expression with the development of leukemia 
with cytogenetic abnormalities. Unknown possible inser -
tion of retrovirus near oncogene sequence or disruption of 
tumor suppressor gene expression.
Clonal expansion and selection of transformed mono -
cytic or myeloid precursor that may be related to aberrant 
expression of oncogenes or deletion of tumor suppressor 
genes.
Expression of transformed cells committed to the granu-
locytic lineage with a large population of its progeny under-
going complete differentiation.
Transformed clone is committed to undergoing plasma 
cell differentiation. Can also attach to erythrocytes and 
platelets resulting in immune-mediated hemolytic anemia 
and thrombocytopenia.
The most common clinical presentation in canine SLE is 
non-erosive polyarthritis. Although the principal autoanti -
body in canine SLE is directed against the cell nucleus (an-
tinuclear antibodies) detectable by immunofluorescence, 
the distribution of the autoantibodies are more restricted in 
the dog than they are in human SLE in that they are pri -
marily IgG antibodies directed against histones, particularly 
H1, H2A, H3, and H4. Another difference is the pattern of 
reactivity to individual histones. In human SLE, the antihis-
tone antibodies are directed against the trypsin-sensitive re-
gions of the histones, whereas in canine SLE the antihistone 
antibodies are reactive with the trypsin-resistant regions.
A possible role of a genetic factor(s) in canine SLE is 
suggested by the predilection of SLE in collies, Shetland 
sheepdogs, beagles, German shepherds, Irish setters, and 
poodles.
6.4 Autoimmune skin disease
The pemphigus group of autoimmune skin diseases results 
from the formation of autoantibodies against the intercel -
lular cement of the skin and consists of four diseases that 
have been documented in both humans and dogs. The pem-
phigus diseases are characterized by the formation of bullae 
(vesicles) within the epidermis. Direct immunofluorescence 
of the skin lesions reveals linear deposits of immunoglob -
ulin surrounding the epidermal cells giving a honeycomb 
appearance. Pemphigus vulgaris is the most severe of the 
pemphigus diseases in the dog and has a predilection for 
the mucocutaneous junctions and oral mucosa. Bullae for -
mation in pemphigus vulgaris results from autoantibody 
production against desmoglein-3, a protein in desmosomes 
that is responsible for squamous cell adhesion. The bullae in 
pemphigus vulgaris are localized to the suprabasilar region 
of the lower epidermis.
Pemphigus vegetans is a rare, mild variant of pemphi -
gus vulgaris. Pemphigus foliaceous is the most common

190 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
autoimmune skin disease in the dog and is characterized by 
superficial subcorneal bullae. The autoantibody in pemphi-
gus foliaceous is directed against desmoglein-1, a protein 
found in squamous cell desmosomes. Unlike pemphigus 
vulgaris, pemphigus foliaceous does not have a predilection 
for mucocutaneous junctions in the dog. It usually involves 
the head and nose but may become generalized. Pemphigus 
erythematosus is a hybrid between pemphigus foliaceous 
and systemic lupus erythematosus with immunological fea-
tures of both diseases. It is confined primarily to the face 
and ears. Direct immunofluorescence of skin lesions shows 
intercellular immunofluorescence typical of the pemphigus 
disease and also concomitant immune complex deposition 
at the dermoepidermal junctions. Some dogs may have an-
tinuclear antibodies.
Bullous pemphigoid is a bullous autoimmune skin dis -
ease that clinically resembles pemphigus vulgaris. Although 
the disease has a predilection for mucocutaneous junctions, 
the groin, and the axilla, it differs from pemphigus vul -
garis in that the bullae are located in the subepidermis. The 
autoantibody in bullous pemphigoid are directed against 
 desmoplakins—proteins in hemidesmosomes that attach 
cells to the basement membrane of the skin. Direct immu -
nofluorescence reveals linear deposits of immunoglobulin 
and/or complement at the dermoepidermal junction.
A breed predilection for collies, Shetland sheep dogs, 
and Doberman pinschers has been reported.
6.5 Autoimmune hemolytic anemia (AIHA)
AIHA in the dog is caused by the production of autoan -
tibodies against antigens on the red cell membrane. The 
pathogenesis of AIHA in the dog is similar to that in other 
species with the destruction of the red cells either through 
intravascular hemolysis mediated by complement or, more 
commonly, through phagocytosis of the red cell by the mac-
rophages of the spleen or liver.
The mechanism of destruction is dependent, in part, on 
the isotype of the autoantibody involved, IgG or IgM. Cold 
agglutinin disease is a variant of AIHA that is primarily 
manifested clinically by necrosis of the extremities rather 
than anemia. The autoantibody involved is an IgM antibody. 
A genetic predisposition is suggested by the apparent breed 
predilection in German shepherds, Irish setters, Old English 
sheepdogs, miniature dachshunds, Scottish terriers, vizslas, 
and cocker spaniels.
Discoid lupus erythematosus (DLE)  clinically re -
sembles the cutaneous manifestation of SLE in dogs, but 
there is no internal organ involvement, and antinuclear 
antibody tests are negative. The lesions are primarily iso -
lated to the face and are exacerbated by sunlight. Direct im-
munofluorescence reveals immune complex deposition at 
the dermoepidermal junction that are usually restricted to 
involved skin only which is in contrast to SLE in which 
the  immune complex deposition extends to adjacent nor -
mal skin. A breed predilection for DLE has been observed 
for collies, Shetland sheepdogs, German shepherds, and 
Siberian huskies.
6.6 Autoimmune thrombocytopenia (AITP)
Autoantibodies to platelets result in a shortened life span of 
the platelets owing to extravascular destruction in the spleen 
that results in the inability to repair damage to capillaries, 
resulting in petechial hemorrhage. The autoantibody in the 
dog recognizes an antigen present on both platelets and 
megakaryocytes. A breed predilection for AITP has been 
observed in Old English sheepdogs, cocker spaniels, and 
poodles.
6.7 Insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus 
(IDDM)
IDDM, or type one diabetes mellitus, in humans is an au -
toimmune disease that is characterized by genetic suscep -
tibility and immunological destruction of the islet fi cells. 
Patients show evidence of autoantibodies to multiple com -
ponents of the islet fi cells and lymphocytic infiltration of 
the islets of Langerhans. Although IDDM occurs sponta -
neously in the dog, an autoimmune basis for the disease 
remains to be determined. Approximately 50% of diabetic 
dogs have evidence of fi-cell antibodies, however, infiltra -
tion of islets with lymphocytes is rarely seen. This may be 
because of diabetes is usually not diagnosed until dogs are 
extremely hyperglycemic and the pancreas is atrophied or 
fibrosis.
6.8 Addison’s disease
Several reports of Addison’s disease have been reported in 
the dog based on the clinical findings of hypoadrenocorti -
cism and the presence of autoantibody activity against adre-
nal tissue by indirect immunofluorescence. Histologically, 
the disease is characterized by a lymphocytic infiltrate and 
atrophy of the gland. One case also had a concomitant hy -
pothyroidism with autoantibodies against thyroid tissue re -
sembling immunoendocrinopathy syndrome or Schmidt’s 
syndrome in humans.
6.9 Lymphocytic thyroiditis
Canine lymphocytic thyroiditis closely resembles 
Hashimoto’s thyroiditis (lymphocytic thyroiditis) in hu -
mans. Histologically, canine lymphocytic thyroiditis is 
characterized by infiltration of the thyroid gland by lym -
phocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages often forming 
germinal centers (lymphoid nodules). Affected dogs possess 
autoantibodies to various thyroid antigens. As in humans,

Autoimmune diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 12  191
approximately 60% of the dogs have antithyroglobulin anti-
bodies. One difference between canine and human patients 
is that autoantibodies to microsomal antigens are present 
in <30% of dogs compared to >85% of humans. Another 
difference between canine and human patients is that dogs 
appear predisposed to producing autoantibodies to triiodo -
thyronine (T3) rather than thyroxine (T4), whereas human 
patients show an equal distribution between the two. A ge -
netic predisposition to the disease is suggested by the in -
creased incidence in beagles, golden retrievers, Doberman 
pinschers, Shetland sheepdogs, great Danes, Irish setters, 
and Old English sheepdogs. Additional evidence for a ge -
netic component to the disease in dogs is that relatives of 
affected animals often have antithyroid antibodies.
6.10 Myasthenia gravis
Myasthenia gravis is an autoimmune disease of humans 
and dogs that is characterized by muscle weakness due to 
a disorder of neuromuscular transmission. The pathogen -
esis of the disease in dogs is similar to that in humans with 
over 90% of affected dogs exhibiting antibodies to acetyl -
choline receptors. These autoantibodies, which bind at the 
postsynaptic membrane of the neuromuscular junction, in -
terrupt transmission by producing a functional blockade to 
the binding of acetylcholine, increasing the endocytosis of 
acetylcholine receptors, and form immune complexes that 
bind complement, causing further destruction of the post -
synaptic membrane.
6.11 Vogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome
V ogt-Koyanagi-Harada syndrome is an autoimmune dis -
ease of humans and dogs which consists of a uveitis of one 
or both eyes characterized by acute iridocyclitis, choroidi -
tis, and retinal detachment. The ocular lesions may be ac -
companied by depigmentation of the iris and retina. The 
disease is also characterized by depigmentation of the skin, 
primarily of the eyelids and nasal planum, and whitening of 
the hair. These features of the disease usually occur after the 
ocular lesions. Histologically, the disease in both humans 
and dogs is characterized by diffuse infiltration of the uvea 
with lymphocytes, plasma cells, and macrophages includ -
ing epithelioid cells and giant cells. In the skin, there is an 
infiltration of lymphocytes and macrophages at the dermo-
epiderma junction. The disease was originally described in 
Akitas but has subsequently been documented in Samoyeds, 
Irish setters, golden retrievers, Saint Bernards, Australian 
sheepdogs, and Shetland sheepdogs.
6.12 Polymyositis
Canine polymyositis is a generalized myositis that affects 
primarily large breed dogs. An autoimmune basis for the 
disease is suspected based upon the finding that approxi -
mately 50% of affected dogs have antinuclear antibodies 
and/or antisarcolemmal antibody. Histologically, there is a 
lymphocytic and plasma cell infiltration of involved muscle.
6.13 Autoimmune masticatory myopathy
A myositis that is restricted to the muscles of mastication 
(masseter, temporalis, and pterygoid muscles) has been 
described in the dog. These muscles are derived from the 
mesoderm rather than myotomes from which other skel -
etal muscle is derived, and contain two distinct types of 
myofibers (1 and 2M). Affected dogs have circulating an -
tibodies to myofiber type 2M, and immunoglobulin deposi-
tion can be demonstrated in biopsies of affected muscles. 
Histologically, there is myofiber degeneration with atrophy 
and fibrosis and infiltration of the affected area with lym -
phocytes and plasma cells.
6.14 Cat autoimmune disease
Over 50% of cats more than 10 years old suffer from a char-
acteristic and progressive chronic interstitial nephritis.
The disease is characterized by intratubular infiltrates of 
lymphocytes and plasma cells, wedge-shaped infarcts ex -
tending from the pelvis to the cortex that result in scarring, a 
decrease in kidney mass, and irregularity in shape and feel.
Affected cats slowly lose renal function over a period 
of several years, eventually becoming polyuric, thin, hyper-
tensive, and anemic. This disorder is a major cause of death 
among older cats, along with cancer. There is no known 
treatment to halt the relentless destruction of the kidney.
Polychondritis of the cartilage of the ears  has been 
observed in cats. The ear pinnae become progressively 
thickened and contorted, much like the proverbial “boxer’s 
ear.” Biopsies show islands of ear cartilage that are isolated 
and surrounded by a predominantly lymphocytic infiltrate. 
The condition will only rarely involve other cartilage in the 
body and is self-limiting as the ear cartilage is destroyed.
“Big pad” disease  is another disorder peculiar to cats 
and of unknown etiology. The pads of the feet, in particu -
lar the metacarpal and metatarsal pads become grossly en -
larged and pillow-like to palpation. As they become larger, 
the pads often crack, causing the cat to become sore-footed. 
Biopsies show a dense plasmacytic/lymphocytic infiltrate. 
Corticosteroid treatment is used in cats showing clinical 
signs.
Cholangiohepatitis is the feline equivalent of chronic 
active hepatitis in dogs and humans. The disease is char -
acterized by lymphocytic/plasmacytic infiltration around 
cholangioles, cholangiolar proliferation, biliary stasis, fi -
broplasia, and parenchymal scarring. Cats are markedly 
icteric, but disproportionately healthy. Many of the cats 
with this disease have high titers of ANA, but it is uncertain

192 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
whether this is part of the etiology of the disease (i.e., a 
form of lupoid hepatitis) or whether the ANA is merely a 
byproduct of slow hepatocyte death, nucleic acid release, 
and enhanced state of immune reactivity. Treatment is with 
glucocorticoids or combination immunosuppressive drug 
therapy.
6.15 Granulomatous diseases of infectious 
etiology
Granulomatous diseases result from inadequate cellular im-
munity, usually against intracellular microbial pathogens. 
The production of strong cellular immunity will lead to 
rapid containment of the invading microbes and mild or 
negligible disease signs. At the opposite extreme, a com -
plete lack of cellular immunity will lead to overwhelming 
systemic disease. Individuals that mount partial cellular im-
munity, however, develop granulomatous inflammation.
The granuloma is a partially successful attempt to limit 
the spread of an intracellular pathogen. The offending mi -
crobes are found in the center of the granuloma within mac-
rophages, while radiating outward are areas of neutrophilic 
infiltrate, lymphocytic/plasmacytic inflammation and, in 
chronic granulomas, fibrous tissue. Because the microbes 
are only weakly contained, living organisms frequently 
break out of the lesion, often within macrophages, and initi-
ate new granulomas in adjacent or distant sites. The course 
of disease, that is rapid recovery, disseminated illness or 
granulomatous disease is a function of the immune system 
and modulating genetic and environmental factors.
Two classic granulomatous diseases in cats include 
the dry or noneffusive form of FIP and chronic ulcerop-
roliferative faucitis/periodontitis associated with chronic 
feline calicivirus infection. The former condition is untreat-
able and inevitably fatal, while the latter may be slowed 
with corticosteroid treatment and judicious removal of teeth 
as periodontal tissue becomes involved. Granulomatous 
inflammation is also associated with a number of superfi -
cial skin infections of cats, including focal mycobacterio -
sis ( Mycobacterium fortuitum , M. cheloni, M. smegmatis, 
M. lepraemurium ), acintomycosis/nocaridosis, bacterial 
L-forms, sporothricosis, miscellaneous saprophyticsoil 
fungi, protothecosis, and leishmaniasis, to name but a few.
6.16 Gammopathies (dysproteinemias or 
paraproteinemias)
The term gammopathy refers to excessive levels of antibody 
globulins in the blood. Two general types of gammopathies 
are recognized: (1) polyclonal and (2) monoclonal. Polyclonal 
gammopathies involve increases in all major immunoglobu-
lin classes (IgG, IgA, and IgM), while monoclonal gammop-
athies involve only a single immunoglobulin class.
6.17 Polyclonal gammopathy
A polyclonal gammopathy is seen in a number of chronic 
infectious diseases of cats, but the most noteworthy is FIP. 
Most cats with FIP, especially those with the dry form, 
will demonstrate progressive rises in all immunoglobulin 
classes. The antibodies produced are not just against vi -
ral antigens, because actual FIP virus antibody titers often 
bear no direct relationship with the actual level of immuno-
globulins in the blood. A benign polyclonal gammopathy 
is seen in many aged cats. This is probably associated with 
asynchronous aging of the T cell compared with the B cell 
system. Although aged cats with a polyclonal gammopathy 
should be checked for underlying diseases, care must be 
taken not to over-react to this finding in otherwise healthy 
animals.
6.18 Monoclonal gammopathy
Monoclonal gammopathies are usually caused by plasma 
cell tumors, that is, multiple myeloma. Less commonly, 
they are associated with chronic lymphocytic leukemias, 
infectious diseases, or benign (idiopathic) causes. The term 
multiple myeloma comes from human medicine, where this 
particular tumor has a predilection to spread widely in the 
marrow cavities of flat bones. This is a misnomer for the 
cat, however, because most plasma cell tumors of cats arise 
from the viscera (liver, spleen, intestine, chest cavity), and a 
smaller proportion infiltrates bone. The most common im -
munoglobulin type seen in feline plasma cell tumors is IgG, 
followed distantly by IgM and then IgA.
Plasma cell tumors can present in a number of manners. 
If the tumor infiltrates and destroys tissues locally, signs 
will be referable to the organ involved just as any other type 
of tumor. Plasma cell tumors can also cause disease through 
the proteins that they produce. High levels of monoclonal 
antibody globulin, especially IgM or IgA, can cause the 
blood to become highly viscous, leading to heart disease 
and hemorrhage in organs such as the eyes and brain.
Some myeloma proteins can agglutinate or congeal in 
the cold (cryoglobulins), leading to thrombosis of small ves-
sels in the cooler extremities such as the ears. Pathological 
accumulations of a monoclonal antibody are almost always 
associated with a significant decrease in normal immuno -
globulins (probably by a negative-feedback mechanism). If 
normal antibody levels are decreased too much, immunode-
ficiency can occur.
6.19 Organ-specific autoimmune diseases
Autoimmune diseases that mainly affect a single organ or 
tissue presumably result from an abnormal response to a 
small number of self-antigens and do not necessarily reflect 
the loss of control of the immune system as a whole. All

Autoimmune diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 12  193
 tissues of the body are potentially susceptible to this form of 
immunological attack. Nevertheless, autoimmune diseases 
directed against endocrine organs, skin, blood, and the ner-
vous system, tend to be most common. Their prevalence de-
pends to a great extent on the species and breed of an animal 
as well as its age.
7 Hormonal influence on autoimmunity
In human medicine, there is a clear female gender pre -
disposition to autoimmune disease. This does not appear 
to be the case for most canine autoimmune diseases, 
where there is little evidence to support either a male or 
female bias. This may in part relate to the fact that many 
companion animals are neutered. A recent epidemiologi -
cal study of 40,000 dogs within a combined university 
teaching hospital database suggested that neutered dogs 
are more likely to die from immune-mediated diseases 
than sexually intact dogs. The hormonal influence on 
autoimmunity has been studied in experimental rodent 
models. For example, particular genetic strains of lab -
oratory rats will develop lymphocytic thyroiditis and 
diabetes mellitus if they are thymectomized early in 
neonatal life and then irradiated. These rats have a dis -
turbed balance of T cells, which is likely to be related to 
the onset of these diseases. The incidence of thyroiditi -
sis much higher in female compared with male rats. If 
female rats are ovariectomized and then injected with 
estrogen, the incidence of thyroiditis significantly de -
creases, but when ovariectomized rats are injected with 
progesterone the incidence of disease becomes even 
greater than in an intact animal.
8 Primary vs secondary autoimmune 
disease
Although genetic background, age, and gender may influ -
ence the development of autoimmune disease, other fac -
tors might more directly act as triggers for the autoimmune 
event. These factors are described below. It is therefore 
possible to distinguish clinically between a primary and a 
secondary autoimmune disease. Primary idiopathic autoim-
mune disease arises in a genetically susceptible individual 
in the absence of any identifiable trigger factor. In contrast, 
secondary autoimmune disease occurs in a patient that has a 
recognized underlying trigger factor.
Confusingly, some autoimmune diseases are often re -
ferred to as “immune-mediated diseases.” Therefore, a 
primary immune-mediated disease is equivalent to a pri -
mary idiopathic autoimmune disease, whereas a secondary 
immune- mediated disease is precipitated by a known trig -
ger factor. For example, a dog in which IMHA is triggered 
by a distinct factor (e.g., drugs, vaccine, neoplasia, or infec-
tion) has secondary IMHA. In contrast, a dog with IMHA in 
which no underlying trigger is identified may be described 
as having either primary IMHA or AIHA.
Cancer or inflammation as a trigger for autoimmunity. 
There are numerous clinical examples of situations in which 
an autoimmune disease might arise concurrently with or 
subsequent to neoplasia or the presence of a chronic inflam-
matory disease. For example, immune-mediated cytopenias 
might arise secondary to a range of tumors (lymphoma, 
splenic hemangiosarcoma, myeloproliferative disease of 
the bone marrow) or to chronic pancreatitis or inflamma -
tory bowel disease. The precise mechanisms underlying 
these associations are poorly defined.
Environmental triggers for autoimmunity. The nature 
of the environment appears to be a factor predisposing to 
autoimmunity. In human populations, factors such as life -
style, affluence, stress, and diet may have a role in the de -
velopment of autoimmune disease. Although it is possible 
that similar factors may contribute to the onset of canine 
autoimmunity, it is difficult to characterize these. Dogs de-
veloping AIHA may have diseases precipitated by stressful 
factors such as oestrus, whelping, or kennelling. One simple 
environmental influence is that of exposure to UV light on 
the development of canine nasal CLE. It is proposed that 
UV light might in some way modify the antigenic structure 
of target autoantigens within the skin.
8.1 Drugs and vaccines as triggers for 
autoimmunity
There is little doubt that particular drugs and vaccines may 
be able to precipitate autoimmunity. Antimicrobial drugs 
are most implicated and in canine medicine trimethoprim-
sulfonamides (TMSs) are particularly recognized as trig -
gers of IMHA, thrombocytopenia, and neutropenia. In these 
cases, the drug may be acting as a happen (see Chapter 2), 
which by binding to the membrane of the target cell directly 
forms a target for an immune response. Alternatively, by 
modifying the structure of a self-protein the drug forms 
a novel drug-protein structure that is also capable of in -
ducing an immune response. Dobermann dogs are par -
ticularly predisposed to this effect, but TMSs may induce 
immune-mediated cytopenia in a range of other breeds. In 
feline medicine, the drugs used to manage hyperthyroidism 
medically (carbimazole/methimazole) are also recognized 
triggers for IMHA, IMTP, and serum ANA production. A 
recent study reported a series of dogs that developed pem -
phigus foliaceus (an autoimmune skin disease) after topical 
application of a combination antiparasitic drug containing 
metaflumizine and amitraz. There is a great deal of inter -
est in both human and veterinary medicine as to whether 
vaccines might also trigger autoimmune diseases ( Aasted 
et al., 1988).
Although there is little doubt that this can happen 
in individual patients, it has proven difficult to  define

194 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
the  immunological mechanisms that might explain the 
association. It is clear that some dogs might develop 
immune- mediated cytopenias or polyarthritis 1–2  weeks 
postvaccination, but such events are relatively rare in the 
vaccinated population. A more common occurrence would 
appear to be the induction of serum autoantibodies to a 
range of connective tissue or epithelial proteins following 
vaccination. There is no evidence that these antibodies are a 
cause of clinical disease and they probably arise because of 
the incorporation into vaccines of small quantities of serum 
or tissue protein used in manufacture.
8.2 Environmental triggers of autoimmunity
This dog has nasal CLE, a complex immune-mediated dis -
ease targeting the skin of the planum nasale. Immunological 
mechanisms involved in this disease include a lymphocytic 
infiltration of the junction between the epidermis and der -
mis and immune complex deposition at the basement mem-
brane zone of the epidermis. UV light is thought to act as 
one trigger for the occurrence of this disease.
8.3 Infectious triggers of autoimmunity
The most significant trigger factor for autoimmunity is 
infection. There is growing evidence that many diseases 
once considered to be primarily idiopathic (autoimmune) 
in nature might actually be triggered by infection. These in-
fections might occur immediately before the onset of auto -
immune disease or there might be a long lag period between 
active infection and the autoimmune sequela. The types of 
infectious agents associated with autoimmune disease are 
those that are difficult to identify by traditional methods 
(i.e., are unculturable and may require techniques such as 
PCR diagnosis) or those that induce chronic infection with 
sequestration of the organism in a body reservoir. In human 
medicine, viral infections are often considered to be triggers 
of autoimmune disease. There is also strong experimental 
evidence that infectious agents can trigger autoreactivity 
(Cozzi et al., 1995 ). There are numerous rodent models in 
which infection, or challenge with a peptide derived from 
an infectious agent, is able to induce clinical autoimmunity 
in a susceptible strain. Such animals may have serum auto-
antibody or autoreactive lymphocytes readily demonstrated 
in splenocyte cultures. The autoimmune disease may be 
inhibited by immunosuppressive therapy. More compel -
lingly, in the absence of an infectious agent, the adoptive 
transfer of T cells from animals with infection-induced au -
toimmunity will lead to the same autoimmune disease in the 
recipient animal. One example of this phenomenon is the 
experimental infection of mice with an attenuated strain of 
the lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus. Shortly after infec-
tion, these mice become anemic due to the triggering of an 
erythrocyte autoantibody that mediates red cell destruction. 
Infectious agents might trigger autoimmune responses by a 
variety of different mechanisms:
● One well-recognized consequence of viral infection is 
the polyclonal activation of numerous clones of B lym -
phocytes, with serum polyclonal hypergammaglobu -
linemia and peripheral lymphadenopathy. Some of these 
B cells may be virus specific, but some viral antigens are 
able to nonspecifically activate any B cell in a mitogenic 
fashion. If these nonspecifically activated cells are auto-
reactive, then autoantibody production might ensue.
● A second possibility relates to the action of some micro-
bially derived substances as “superantigens.” Classical 
examples of superantigens are the toxins produced by cer-
tain staphylococci, but a wide range of infectious agents 
can elaborate superantigenic substances. A superantigen 
is able to nonspecifically activate a range of different T 
or B cells and if these targets are autoreactive, then au -
toimmunity might result. Superantigens nonspecifically 
activate T cells by cross linking the variable region of 
the TCR β chain with the α chain of MHC class II in the 
absence of interaction with any peptide. Superantigenic 
activation of T cells involves binding to the outer region 
of the antigen-binding fragment of the BCR.
Superantigens. A superantigen (generally derived 
from an infectious agent) can nonspecifically activate 
quiescent autoreactive T or B cells and initiate autoim -
munity. The superantigen cross-links the TCR β chain 
with the MHC class II α chain or binds to the BCR ex -
ternal to the antigen-binding site of the molecule.
● The third possible mechanism involves a microorganism 
that attaches to the membrane of a host cell or infects 
that cell, leading to the expression of microbial antigen 
on the cell surface. An appropriate adaptive immune 
response is made to the infectious agent, but this also 
nonspecifically destroys the host cell that carries the or-
ganism. This is known as the “innocent bystander” ef -
fect. This effect may be important in diseases such as 
feline infectious anemia where circulating erythrocytes 
are parasitized by the surface membrane-dwelling or -
ganism Mycoplasma haemofelis  ( Couto et  al., 1989 ). 
Cats with this disease are generally Coombs test posi -
tive (i.e., have antibodies associated with the surface 
of RBCs) and the infection and anemia precede the 
development of these erythrocyte-bound antibodies. 
Although it is possible that the antibodies target the in -
fectious agent, there are two alternative hypotheses. The 
first hypothesis suggests that the infection triggers the 
production of true autoantibodies and the second sug -
gests that by binding to an autoantigen, the infectious 
agent changes the structure of that antigen, making it a 
target for an immune response (the “modified self” hy -
pothesis, as may also occur with the binding of a drug as 
discussed above).

Autoimmune diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 12  195
● Some autoimmune diseases involve circulating immune 
complex deposition in antigen-excess type III hypersen-
sitivity (Bravo et al., 1996).
A fourth possibility for infection triggering autoimmunity 
is that the antigenic component of such complexes (which 
is rarely characterized) is derived from a microorganism. 
The “innocent bystander” effect. An infectious agent or 
drug that attaches to the surface of a host cell (e.g., an RBC) 
directly provides a target for the adaptive immune response 
or combines with a self-antigen to form a novel target (mod-
ified self). The immune response, in this case antibody and 
classical complement, will destroy the host cell in addition 
to the specific target in a process known as “bystander de -
struction”. An example of such an infection might be feline 
infectious anemia in which M. haemofelis  parasitizes the 
surface of circulating erythrocytes. Cats with this infection 
become Coombs test positive. The red cell-bound antibody 
might be specific for the parasite, an erythrocyte membrane 
protein (autoantigen), or a novel epitope formed through the 
infection.
8.4 Inflammatory response might lead  
to damage
To self-tissue, with the release of self-antigens that are pro-
cessed and presented to allow activation of self-reactive 
lymphocytes. The inflammatory milieu might also simply 
provide sufficient cytokine signaling and MHC class II up-
regulation to permit nonspecific activation of autoreactive 
lymphocytes. Finally, the inflammatory response may alter 
the way in which APCs deal with self-antigen. In normal cir-
cumstances some self-antigens (cryptic epitopes) may not be 
presented by an APC to prevent autoreactivity. In an inflam-
matory context, expression of these hidden epitopes might oc-
cur, thereby allowing activation of self-reactive lymphocytes.
● Any infection may induce a local tissue inflammatory 
response with an adaptive immune response character -
ized by infiltration of effector cells producing cytokine. 
If the inflammatory response includes IFN-g produc -
tion, this cytokine might lead to the induction of nonpro-
fessional APCs (e.g., epithelial, stromal, or endothelial 
cells) that may express MHC molecules containing self-
peptides and there by trigger autoreactive T cells.
● A sixth possibility for infection-associated autoim -
munity is that this appropriate immune response to an 
infectious agent extends inadvertently to self-tissue 
through the phenomenon of “bystander activation.” This 
might work in different ways. An infectious or inflam -
matory response within a tissue involving tissue damage 
and infiltration of pathogen-specific lymphocytes and 
local cytokine production may lead to secondary au -
toimmunity. Damaged tissue may release self-antigen, 
which can be processed and presented for activation of 
autoreactive lymphocytes. Alternatively, the inflamma -
tory milieu may alter the activity of APCs to allow them 
to present previously “cryptic” (hidden) self-antigenic 
peptides. The immune response to pathogens might ex -
tend to self-antigens via the process of “epitope spread-
ing” (Yuhki and O'Brien, 1988).
● The final mechanism is that of “molecular  mim -
icry.” This suggests that microbial antigens and self-
antigens might share regions of the peptide sequence. 
Presentation of a microbially derived peptide as an at -
tempt to induce a legitimate adaptive immune response 
to infection might inadvertently provide the means for 
activation of autoreactive T cells that have a TCR that 
can bind the cross-reactive molecular mimic. Activation 
of autoreactive Th cells in this fashion might also pro -
vide co-stimulatory signals for autoreactive B cells that 
directly recognize the molecular mimic expressed by the 
microbe (Zaccaro et al., 1995).
9 Immunodiagnostic tests for 
autoimmunity
Wherever possible, clinical suspicion of an autoimmune 
disease should be supported by immunodiagnostic testing 
aimed to demonstrate the presence of an autoantibody or 
autoreactive (Zeidner et al., 1993).
10 Immunodiagnostic tests for 
autoimmunity
Wherever possible, clinical suspicion of an autoimmune 
disease should be supported by immunodiagnostic testing 
aimed to demonstrate the presence of an autoantibody or 
autoreactive T cell population with specificity for cells of 
the target tissue or organ. In veterinary medicine, there are 
relatively few commercially available tests relevant to the 
diagnosis of autoimmune disease and these are mostly de -
signed to detect circulating (serum) or cell-bound autoanti-
body. These tests include:
● The Coombs test (or direct antiglobulin test, DAT) for 
the detection of erythrocyte-bound autoantibody (Atkins 
and Schofield, 1972).
● Tests for the detection of antiplatelet or antineutrophil 
antibodies.
● Radioimmunoassay for the detection of antibodies to the 
neuromuscular acetylcholine receptor (AchR) in myas -
thenia gravis.
● ELISA for the detection of thyroglobulin, T3, or T4 
autoantibodies.
● Indirect immunofluorescence, immunoprecipitation, or 
ELISA for the detection of serum ANA.

196 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
● Indirect agglutination or ELISA for the detection of se -
rum or synovial fluid rheumatoid factor (RF).
● Tissue immunofluorescence or immunohistochemistry for 
the detection of cell-associated autoantibody or immune 
complex in situ; for example, interepithelial adhesion mol-
ecule autoantibody in pemphigus foliaceus or glomerular 
immune complex in membranous glomerulonephritis. 
Although a range of other autoantibody detection methods 
is documented, the tests are not widely available in clinical 
practice. Examples of the most commonly performed tests 
are given below (Arthur et al., 1992).
Coombs test The Coombs test (or DAT) is named after 
Robin Coombs, a veterinarian whose contribution to clini -
cal immunology has been described in. The test aims to 
demonstrate the presence of antibody and/or complement 
attached to the surface of circulating erythrocytes in pri -
mary or secondary IMHA. 
10.1 Antinuclear antibody test
The ANA test aims to demonstrate the presence  of se -
rum autoantibody specific for one or more of the constitu-
ents of the cellular nucleus. A range of antigenic material 
is present within the nucleus and although it is possible to 
determine the fine specificity of the reaction by techniques 
such as gel precipitation or ELISA, the ANA test performed 
most widely simply seeks evidence for the presence of any 
nuclear autoantibodies ( Argyle et al., 1996 ). A proportion 
of normal animals or animals with chronic disease may 
have low-titer serum ANA as a reflection of cell turnover 
in the body. In the context of autoimmune disease, only a 
high-titer ANA is regarded as significant. The presence of 
high-titer serum ANA is one of the diagnostic criteria for 
the rare multi systemic autoimmune disease SLE, but this 
autoantibody might also be present in animals with a range 
of other autoimmune disorders (Andrews et al., 1992a, b).
The most widely used methodology for the detection 
of serum ANA is the indirect immunofluorescence assay. 
A nucleated cell line is grown over the wells of a sectored 
glass microscope slide and fixed to the glass surface (such 
slides are prepared commercially). Serial dilutions of pa -
tient serum are added to individual wells of the slide and 
if ANA is present, it will bind to the nucleus of the cells 
(Blum et al., 1985).

Autoimmune diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 12  197

199

Chapter 13
Diseases of cardiovascular system of 
dogs and cats
1 Introduction
The arteries, veins, and capillaries that make up the circula-
tory system which are connected by a pump called the heart. 
The blood is substantially isolated from the body’s other ex-
tracellular fluid compartment, the interstitial fluid; which is 
the fluid that nourishes the cells, in all vertebrate species. It is 
a closed circulatory system when blood flows through blood 
vessels and travels unidirectionally from the heart along one 
of two circulatory pathways before returning to the heart. 
Invertebrate animals have open circulatory systems, where 
the circulatory fluid nourishes the internal organs directly 
despite possibly being pushed by a pumping heart.
Heart valves aid in directing blood flow in the right di -
rection. The signals that tell the heart muscle to contract in a 
predictable and ordered way are sent by an electrical system. 
And thousands of blood arteries, from the strong and big 
aorta to the smallest capillaries, act as the body’s transporta-
tion system for blood. Numerous variables, such as disease, 
genetics, and other pressures, can gradually impair heart 
function. Up to a degree, the heart can adjust, but eventually, 
its capacity will deteriorate and heart failure symptoms will 
appear. Let us first examine conditions, congenitally affect-
ing the heart muscle to better understand how this occurs, 
and then move on to conditions affecting the heart’s valves, 
blood arteries, and electrical conduction system (Fig. 1).
2 Congenital heart diseases
Congenital heart disease (CHD) is defined as a defect in the 
structure or function of the cardiocirculatory system that ex-
ists from birth, even if it is hardly identified years later. In 
most cases, a causal reason for cardiac abnormalities can -
not be determined, but they appear to be the outcome of 
an interaction between multiple genetic and environmental 
systems. Because many animals pass away before a heart 
abnormality can be adequately detected, it is challenging 
to estimate the true prevalence of CHD. As a result, there 
are breed variances for specific cardiovascular abnormali -
ties on a national and regional level. Aortic stenosis (or sub-
aortic) is the most prevalent abnormality in canines in some 
countries, followed by tetralogy of fallot (TF), patent ductus 
arteriosus (PDA), pulmonic stenosis (PS), ventricular sep -
tal defects (VSD), dysplasia of the atrioventricular valves 
(DA V), dysplasia of the left cranial vena cava (PCVC), and 
peritoneopericardial diaphragmatic hernia (PPDH).
2.1 Subaortic stenosis
The most frequent congenital heart abnormality found in 
large breeds of dogs is obstruction of the left ventricular out-
flow (LVOT) tract. Although there are valvular and supra -
valvular forms of aortic stenosis, the most prevalent kind in 
dogs is fibromuscular subaortic stenosis, which results in a 
fixed form. A dynamic type of LVOT may be present in some 
canines. Anomalies of the mitral valve complex have been 
seen coexisting with fixed and dynamic obstruction. Aortic 
stenosis in cats is rare; however, valvular and supravalvular 
variants have also been documented. Previous research on 
Newfoundland dogs revealed that SAS is a postnatal devel-
opment rather than a true congenital disease (Fig. 2).
Three different grades of severity have been described:
Grade 1 The interventricular septum below the aortic 
valve had tiny, elevated nodules of thickened 
endocardium as the lesion
Grade 2 Below the aortic valve, lesions created a narrow 
ridge of thickened fibrous endocardium that 
partially surrounded the LVOT
Grade 3 Just below the aortic valve, the LVOT was entirely 
encompassed by a fibrous band, ridge, or collar. 
Although sometimes puppies as young as a few 
weeks old may be afflicted by severe types of 
stenosis, the most severe kinds affect dogs over the 
age of 6 months

200 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
2.1.1 Breed predispositions
Large dog breeds, particularly German shepherds, 
Boxers, Rottweilers, Golden Retrievers, Samoyeds, and 
Newfoundlands (inherited condition), are most prone.
2.1.2 Pathophysiolgy of subaortic stenosis 
(SAS)
2.1.3 Clinical management
In severe situations, balloon catheter dilation may, at least 
temporarily, diminish the obstruction’s severity. Beta-
blockers are frequently used in the medical treatment of 
dogs with severe SAS in an effort to improve the func -
tion of the left ventricle and the ventricular diastolic in -
flow as well as to lessen the degree of LVOT blockage. 
Additionally, beta-blockers have a direct antiarrhythmic 
effect that lowers the risk of syncope and unexpected 
death. When there is a known possibility of hematogenous 
exposure to infectious organisms, prophylactic antibiotic 
therapy to prevent bacterial endocarditis should be taken 
into consideration.
2.2 Pulmonic stenosis (PS)
It may exist alone or in conjunction with other heart ab -
normalities. Dogs have been described as having two 
forms:
a) Type 1 pulmonary valve dysplasia: The commissures 
are united with a central orifice, and the valve leaflets 
appear slightly thickened.
FIG. 1 Anatomy of the cardiac conduction system.
FIG. 2 Stenotic aortic valve.

Diseases of cardiovascular system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 13  201
b) A moderate-to-severe thickening and hypoplasia of the 
valve leaflets as well as occlusion of the orifice by su -
perfluous valve tissue characterize Type 2 pulmonary 
valve dysplasia (Fig. 3).
2.2.1 Breed predispositions
Specially vulnerable breeds include the English Bulldog, 
Mastiff, Fox Terrier, Samoyed, tiny Schnauzer, Cocker 
Spaniel, and West Highland White Terrier.
2.2.2 Pathophysiology of PS
A congenital abnormality called pulmonic stenosis is 
marked by stenosis, or narrowing, of the outflow tract, 
which allows blood to pass from the heart to the lungs. This 
is most frequently brought on by a malformed valve with 
some fusion of the pulmonic valve leaflets. The pressure 
gradient across the valve determines the degree of pulmonic 
stenosis. A pressure gradient between 30 and 50 mmHg, be-
tween 50 and 80 mmHg, and above 80 mmHg, respectively, 
is indicative of mild, moderate, and severe illness. A normal 
life is possible for dogs with mild pulmonic stenosis. Dogs 
with severe pulmonic stenosis, however, exhibit clinical 
symptoms such as an inability to tolerate strenuous activ -
ity, dizziness, right-sided congestive heart failure, irregular 
heart rhythms, and, in rare cases, abrupt death.
2.2.3 Clinical management
For dogs with moderate-to-severe pulmonic stenosis, a mini-
mally invasive operation called a balloon valvuloplasty is the 
treatment of choice. A small incision will be made on your 
dog’s neck or groyne to accomplish the surgery, and a cathe-
ter will then be inserted into the vein and the dog’s heart. The 
stenotic pulmonic valve will then be crossed by the special-
ized balloon catheter, and the balloon will be inflated to split 
apart the valve leaflets and create a bigger opening, facilitat-
ing easier blood flow from the heart to the lungs.
2.3 Dysplasia of the atrioventricular 
valves (DAV)
A wide range of abnormalities, including anomalies in 
valve leaflets, chordae tendineae, and/or papillary muscles, 
have been found in dogs and cats with atrioventricular valve 
malformations. Atrioventricular valve dysplasia can mani -
fest either alone or in conjunction with other abnormalities.
2.3.1 Breed predispositions
Mitral dysplasia is more likely to occur in Great Danes, German 
Shepherds, Bull Terriers, Golden Retrievers, Newfoundlands, 
Dalmatians, Mastiffs, and cats. Cats, Old English sheepdogs, 
German Shepherds, Weimaraners, and Labrador retrievers have 
all been recorded to have tricuspid dysplasia (Figs. 4 and 5).
FIG. 3 Pulmonic stenosis.
FIG. 4 Mitral valve dysplasia.

202 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
2.3.2 Breed predispositions
Any dog breed can develop mitral and tricuspid valve 
abnormalities; however, some are thought to be predis -
posed. Such a predilection shows that these breeds have 
a genetic or heritable origin. Bull Terriers and German 
Shepherds are two breeds that have mitral valve dysfunc -
tion more frequently recognized. The Labrador Retriever 
is by far the breed where tricuspid valve dysfunction is 
diagnosed the most frequently. It has been established 
that this breed has a genetic basis behind it. Cats are 
occasionally diagnosed with A V valve abnormalities as 
well.
2.3.3 Pathophysiology of DVS
When mitral regurgitation is considerable, blood flows 
back into the left atrium, causing the left atrium to become 
overfilled with blood (and the left ventricle). These cham -
bers grow in an effort to hold the additional blood, which 
causes this. When regurgitation is severe, the chambers’ 
capacity to expand hits a limit, and pressure inside them 
starts to rise. When critical pressure is reached, fluid in -
side the left atrium-connected lung vessels starts to flow 
out (pulmonary edema), causing left-sided congestive 
heart failure to manifest clinically (CHF). The typical 
symptoms of left-sided congestive heart failure (CHF) 
are fast and laborious breathing (contrary to popular be -
lief, coughing is not a common clinical sign of congestive 
heart failure in dogs or cats). Advanced disease can cause 
a generalized decrease in blood flow to the body, which 
can lead to tiredness, an inability to exercise, loss of ap -
petite, and/or weight loss.
Similar to mitral valve dysplasia, tricuspid valve dyspla-
sia causes fluid to accumulate in bodily cavities instead of 
the lungs (pulmonary edema), most commonly the belly and 
less frequently the pleural space (chest cavity). Right-sided 
congestive heart failure in dogs often results in a visibly 
enlarged abdomen. This may be uncomfortable, especially 
while lying down, and may make it difficult to breathe, es -
pecially while sleeping or relaxing.
2.3.4 Clinical management
The primary goal of A V valve dysplasia treatment is to 
reverse congestive heart failure symptoms. Diuretics 
(frusemide, spironolactone), angiotensin-converting en -
zyme inhibitors (benazepril, enalapril), and the inodilator 
pimobendan are among the drugs that are frequently pre -
scribed. The kidneys must expel more salt and water as a re-
sult of the diuretic. As a result, the fluid in the lungs known 
as pulmonary edema is removed, which enhances your pet’s 
breathing.
The most effective treatment for right-sided congestive 
heart failure (fluid in the belly or chest cavity) is frequently 
repeated physical removal by your veterinarian (generally 
by using an appropriately sized needle or catheter under se-
dation). A beta blocker is frequently used to treat canines 
that have the above-discussed type of mitral valve dyspla -
sia, which results in a mitral valve that prevents blood from 
leaving the heart. The heart rate-slowing medication beta 
blockers can lessen (and in some cases completely eradi -
cate) the blockage caused by the mitral valve. This can po -
tentially reverse the thickness of the left ventricle if it is 
started early.
2.4 Patent ductus arteriosus (PDA)
The ductus arteriosus in the fetus allows pulmonary arte -
rial blood to enter the descending aorta and bypass the un -
developed lungs, where it is oxygenated by the placenta. 
At birth, the rise in oxygen tension causes local prosta -
glandins to be inhibited, which results in the ductus’s 
functional closure, which is followed by anatomic closure 
in the weeks that follow. Blood shunts from the descend -
ing aorta to the pulmonary artery if the ductus fails to seal 
(Fig. 6).
2.4.1 Breed predispositions
Poodles, German shepherds, Collies, Pomeranians, 
Shetland, Maltese, English Springer spaniels, Keeshonds, 
and Yorkshire terrier canines are among the many overrepre-
sented breeds of dogs that are predisposed to PDA in Biches.
FIG. 5 Tricuspid valve dysplasia.

Diseases of cardiovascular system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 13  203
2.4.2 Pathophysiology
The effects of a PDA are mostly influenced by the ductus’s 
diameter and pulmonary vascular resistance. Because the 
aortic pressure is greater than the pulmonary artery pressure 
throughout the whole cardiac cycle, blood will shunt from 
the descending aorta to the pulmonary artery when pulmo -
nary vascular resistance is normal. As a result, the left atrium 
and left ventricle get enhanced venous return and higher 
pulmonary flow. Left ventricular eccentric hypertrophy, left 
atrial dilatation, and mitral insufficiency are all results of 
volume excess on the left side of the heart. Congestive heart 
failure on the left side might result from volume overload. 
Left-to-right shunting declines and  right-to-left shunting 
emerges when pulmonary vascular resistance rises.
2.4.3 Clinical management
In every case of left-to-right shunting, surgical PDA liga -
tion is advised as soon as possible following diagnosis. 
Without ligation, it is anticipated that more than 50% of 
cases will pass away within a year of diagnosis. Some 
dogs, most often those with minor shunts, may live a long 
life. Coil embolization, which involves transcatheter de -
livery of thin metal coils, offers an alternative to surgical 
ductus repair.
2.5 Ventricular septal defects (VSD)
The most prevalent kind of VSD in dogs is membranous/
perimembranous, and the other two types are outflow (in -
fundibular/supracristal), atrioventricular canal inflow, mus-
cle, and (trabecular). VSD may manifest either alone or in 
conjunction with other heart abnormalities (i.e., PS, pul -
monary atresia, truncus arteriosus, and double-outlet right 
ventricle).
2.5.1 Pathophysiology
The size of the defect and the relative resistance in the sys-
temic and pulmonary vascular beds dictate the physiologic 
effects of a VSD. Smaller defects (“restrictive” VSD) cause 
little to no functional disruption because pulmonary blood 
flow is only slightly increased. The quantity of flow to the 
pulmonary and systemic circulation is determined by the 
resistances of the two beds, however, if the defect is big 
(“nonrestrictive” VSD).
Initially, there is an excess of pulmonary vascular resis-
tance due to systemic vascular resistance, favoring left-to-
right shunting. The left ventricular diastolic pressure might 
rise as pulmonary flow increases due to increased venous 
return to the left atrium and left ventricle. When the left-
to-right shunt is significant, left ventricular failure is likely. 
The amount of left-to-right shunting typically decreases 
with time as the pulmonary vascular resistance rises. Blood 
shunting from left to right stops when pulmonary vascular 
resistance equals or exceeds systemic resistance, and right-
to-left shunting then starts.
2.5.2 Breed predispositions
Beagles, English Springer Spaniels, English bulldogs, and 
Keeshonds (whose genetic foundation has been established) 
are prone.
2.5.3 Clinical management
Surgery with cardiopulmonary bypass is required for the de-
finitive treatment of symptomatic or severe lesions, and it 
is rarely carried out. In dogs with significant VSD, pulmo -
nary artery banding can be utilized to induce supravalvular 
pulmonary stenosis and lessen the severity of left-to-right 
shunting. Congestive heart failure may need to be managed 
medically if surgical repair or palliation are not options. 
When there is a known possibility of hematogenous expo -
sure to pathogenic organisms, prophylactic antibiotic ther -
apy should be taken into consideration in patients with VSD.
2.6 Tetralogy of fallot (TF)
The largest ventricular septal defect, an aorta that crosses 
the left and right ventricles, obstruction of the right ventric-
ular outflow tract, and right ventricular hypertrophy are the 
FIG. 6 PDA.

204 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
characteristics of TF, the most prevalent cyanotic congenital 
heart condition. These defects are caused by an improper 
alignment of the embryologic conotruncal septum.
2.6.1 Breed predispositions
Samoyeds, Beagles, Bulldogs, and Keeshonds have a par -
ticular propensity.
2.6.2 Pathophysiology
Desaturated blood is pushed through the ventricular septal 
defect to mingle with blood flowing from the left ventricle 
as a result of the right ventricular outflow tract obstruction 
and increased right ventricular systolic pressure. Because 
chronic hypoxia increases renin production and erythropoi-
etin release, it may cause polycythemia.
2.6.3 Clinical management
The preferred technique of treating TF is definitive cor -
rection; however, because cardiopulmonary bypass is nec -
essary, this procedure is rarely carried out in veterinary 
medicine. Patients who exhibit clinical symptoms of se -
vere hypoxemia may find relief through surgically creating 
a systemic-to-pulmonary shunt. Exercise restriction and 
phlebotomy (to prevent hyperviscosity-related symptoms if 
polycythemia is present) are two medical therapy options. 
Because B-blockers lower right-to-left shunting by regu -
lating heart rate and preventing exercise, they have been 
shown to ameliorate symptoms.
2.7 Eisenmerger’s syndrome (ES)
Aorticopulmonary septal defect, PDA, VSD, and other con-
nections between the systemic and pulmonary circulations 
that cause right-to-left shunting of blood are examples of 
the ES.
2.7.1 Pathophysiology
When there is significant left-to-right shunting, the pul -
monary vasculature is exposed to higher blood flow and 
pressure, which frequently results in pulmonary vascular 
obstructive disease and higher pulmonary vascular resis -
tance. The shunt reverses as the pulmonary vascular re -
sistance approaches or exceeds systemic resistance, and 
cyanosis develops. Due to the right ventricle’s need to expel 
against strong pulmonary vascular resistance, it enlarges. 
Secondary polycythemia results from hypoxemic blood be-
ing infused into the kidneys.
2.7.2 Clinical management
Exercise should be limited, stress should be avoided, and 
occasional phlebotomy should be used to keep the PCV 
between 58% and 65%. In dogs with right-to-left shunting 
PDA, therapy with hydroxyurea has been shown to reduce 
the red blood cell volume and improve clinical symptoms.
2.8 Atrial septal defects (ASD)
Small animals with ASD have rare congenital heart abnor -
malities. They could show up as a single abnormality or as a 
component of a more complex deformity. ASD can be clas-
sified into four categories.
There are four types of atrial septal defects:
1. Ostium secundum, which affects the fossa ovalis.
2. Ostium primum, or partial atrioventricular canal defect, 
which is located in the lowermost part of the interatrial 
septum and linked to endocardial cushion defects.
3. Sinus venosus, which affects the superior part of the in-
teratrial septum.
4. Coronary sinus, which is situated in the posteroinferior 
angle of the atrial septum.
Small ASD typically does not have major hemodynamic 
effects. The shunt flow through an ASD does not produce 
a murmur since the pressures in the two atria are identi -
cal; however, a relative pulmonic stenosis murmur may be 
heard. 
2.9 Atrioventricular canal defects (AVC)
Complete A VC, also known as a complete endocardial 
cushion defect, comprises an anterior mitral valve leaflet 
and a septal leaflet of the tricuspid valve, as well as a VSD 
in the entrance section of the ventricular septum. Partial 
A VC or ostium primum ASD are the terms used to describe 
the defect when the ventricular septum is intact. Cats are 
more frequently than dogs reported to have A VC abnormali-
ties. All four chambers of patients with complete A VC are in 
communication with one another as a result of atrioventric-
ular septal abnormalities, insufficiency, or atrioventricular 
valves. In most cases, pulmonary hypertension and conges-
tive heart failure appear early.
3 Acquired heart diseases
In clinical practice, overweight dogs and canines with heart 
conditions are regularly seen. Poor nutrition, insufficient 
exercise, and management carelessness encourage obesity, 
which may cause cardiac illnesses. Cardiovascular disease 
is known to be brought on by a number of nutritional de -
ficiencies, including dietary protein, fat, vitamins, miner -
als, and trace elements ( Devi et  al., 2009 ). Due to atrial 
hypertension and left ventricular hypertrophy, a high-fat 
diet causes abdominal obesity in dogs as well as noticeably 
elevated blood pressure and heart rates.
The most common causes of congestive heart failure 
(CHF) are degenerative mitral valve disease (MVD) and

Diseases of cardiovascular system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 13  205
DCM ( Schober et  al., 2010 ). The most frequent cause of 
heart failure in dogs is chronic MVD, which progresses 
slowly and rarely exhibits any overt clinical heart disease 
symptoms prior to death ( Borgarelli et al., 2008 ; Schober 
et  al., 2010). The most prevalent heart condition in dogs, 
accounting for 75%–80% of all cardiac diseases, is myxo -
matous valve disease, also known as chronic mitral valve 
insufficiency (CMVI), which is caused by progressive myx-
omatous degeneration of either the mitral valve alone or 
together with the tricuspid valve, leading to incomplete co-
aptation of the leaflets and valvular regurgitation (Pedersen 
et al., 1996; Haggstrom et al., 2005; Borgarelli et al., 2008).
Small breed dogs are more susceptible to the disease 
than large breed dogs, and the prevalence of the condition 
tends to increase substantially in dogs who are 4–5  years 
old and older ( Buchanan, 1977 ; Borgarelli et  al., 2004 ). 
Clinically, it is crucial to identify CHF as soon as possible 
to save the animal’s life ( Schober et  al., 2010 ). Diastolic 
dysfunction plays a noteworthy role in the pathophysiology 
of cardiovascular disorders. Diastolic dysfunction symp -
toms and prognosis, which typically lead to systolic dys -
function, dictate the course of a disease ( Cavalcanti et al., 
2007). Left-sided congestive heart failure is indicated by 
an elevated left ventricular filling pressure ( Dabbah et al., 
2006). A pericardial effusion lowers cardiac output and 
eventually results in right-sided congestive heart failure 
when an excessively large volume of fluid accumulates 
in the pericardial sac with internal heart pressure elevated 
(Gugjoo et al., 2013c; Bodh et al., 2014).
3.1 Diagnosis
Heart disease can be diagnosed using a variety of diagnostic 
techniques, such as clinical examination, auscultation, tho -
racic radiography, electrocardiography, echocardiography, 
and cardiac biomarkers (Nakayama et al., 2001). The three 
most effective diagnostic techniques used to identify canine 
cardiac disorders were auscultation, electrocardiography, 
and roentgenography (Detweiler et al., 1961).
The degree and nature of the disease determine the clini-
cal indications of heart disease, which are initially asymp -
tomatic. A dog may exhibit more pronounced symptoms 
like exhaustion, a decreased desire to walk or exercise, 
difficulty breathing, loss of appetite, weight loss, a bloated 
tummy, difficulty sleeping, or coughing when heart disease 
develops into congestive heart failure (MacPete, 2018). The 
most useful component of the cardiac examination for iden-
tifying aberrant rhythms and heart sounds is auscultation.
3.2 Thoracic radiography
The most often utilized diagnostic method for heart prob -
lems is thoracic radiography (Thrall, 2007). A key indicator 
of cardiac disease is a change in heart size, which can be 
used to track the condition and its severity ( Buchanan and 
Bucheler, 1995; Hamlin, 1999). However, it is very diffi -
cult to give an accurate subjective assessment of whether 
the cardiac silhouette is inflated or malformed. Cardiac size 
is often examined by comparing the appearance of the car -
diac silhouette in a patient with examples of normal (Thrall, 
2007). It would be preferable to contrast the patient’s radio-
graphs with those of a healthy dog of the same breed when 
assessing the patient’s heart. Dogs’ hearts were measured 
in thoracic radiographs using the vertebral scale system by 
Bodh et al. (2016b) and Gugjoo et al. (2013a, b).
Measuring various heart dimensions and cardiothoracic 
ratios is one of the objective approaches for assessing the 
cardiac silhouette ( Hamlin, 1968 ). The length of the tho -
racic vertebral bodies and the dimensions of the cardiac pro-
file are compared using the vertebral heart scale (VHS), a 
technique for measuring the heart (Buchanan and Bucheler, 
1995). VHS for dogs often ranges from 8.7 to 10.7. In dogs 
with heart disease, VHS readings tend to rise ( Lamb et al., 
2001; Nakayama et  al., 2001 ), providing insight into the 
progression of the disease (Fig. 7).
For all the breeds except one, they recorded a trend for 
dogs with cardiac disease (but not respiratory disease) to 
have higher mean values on the scale than normal dogs of 
the same breed; however, at the optimal value of the scale 
for distinguishing between dogs of each breed with and 
without cardiac disease, the sensitivity and specificity were 
relatively low, in the range 58%–83%. Lamb et al. (2001)  
assessed the influence of VHS on the accuracy of the radio-
graphic diagnosis of cardiac disease. With the aid of three 
independent, blinded observers, they looked at the  thoracic 
FIG. 7 Illustration of vertebral heart scoring (VHS) calculation in a dog.

206 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
radiographs of 50 dogs with known cardiac disease, 26 
dogs with other thoracic diseases, and 50 dogs without any 
clinical signs of cardiovascular or respiratory disease. They 
recorded a VHS over 10.7 on the lateral radiograph as a 
moderately accurate sign of cardiac disease.
Similar to the previous study, Greco et  al. (2008)  ex -
amined the impact of right vs left recumbency on the com -
putation of the vertebral heart score (VHS) in 63 healthy 
dogs and discovered that right lateral recumbency was sig -
nificantly associated with a higher VHS (9.80.6 vs 9.50.8; 
P 0.0004). While there was no discernible effect of gender 
or dog size on VHS readings, they did observe a greater 
difference between left- and right-sided measures when tak-
ing the kind of thorax into account. In eight different dog 
breeds, including the Pug, Pomeranian, Yorkshire Terrier, 
Dachshund, Bulldog, Shih Tzu, Lhasa Apso, and Boston 
Terrier, Grant et al. (2013) described VHS measures.
The Pug, Pomeranian, Bulldog, and Boston Terrier 
groups had significantly higher VHS ( >9.70.5), while the 
Lhasa Apso group’s VHS was significantly affected by body 
condition score. A substantial increase in VHS of the Bulldog 
(P = 0.028) and Boston terrier (P = 0.0004) groups was linked 
to abnormal thoracic vertebrae. However, there was no dis-
cernible change in the thoracic depth-to-width ratio on VHS. 
Since data from dogs with cardiac disease and healthy dogs 
have a lot in common, measuring the cardiac silhouette does 
not help with the identification of cardiac disease.
This overlap happens in part because certain breeds 
have, particularly large-appearing hearts, and in part be -
cause dogs with concentric hypertrophy and those assessed 
in the early stages of their condition may not have any ma -
jor cardiac enlargement. There is also proof that women’s 
mean VHS measures are smaller than men’s ( Lamb et al., 
2001). There is still a sizable overlap between healthy dogs 
and dogs with cardiac illness, even when utilizing breed-
specific normal VHS ranges.
The accuracy ranges from 58% to 83% at the ideal VHS 
value for identifying cardiac from noncardiac diseased dogs 
of each breed ( Lamb et al., 2001 ). The drawbacks suggest 
the demand for an alternative diagnostic technique for ca -
nine heart disorders confirmatory diagnosis. Despite the 
poor reliability of clinical indications, CHF might never -
theless be suspected based on these indicators. The most 
widely used approach for the diagnosis of CHF is thoracic 
radiography, which is regarded as the “gold standard” in 
clinical diagnosis (Balbarini et al., 1991). However, the ra-
diograph’s sensitivity and specificity are questioned, par -
ticularly when heart and lung illnesses are present.
3.3 Electrocardiography
The electrocardiogram (ECG) is a strong noninvasive diag-
nostic technique that is frequently used to monitor heart rate 
(HR), cardiac rhythm, conduction integrity, and electrical 
axis as well as to identify cardiac problems in canines (Tilley, 
1985). Cardiac arrhythmias and intra-cardiac conduction ab-
normalities in dogs are frequent issues that are well under -
stood by ECG ( Gugjoo et al., 2014a ). Lannek published a 
thorough statistical analysis of the normal EKG of a normal 
dog in 1949. He also made observations on a number of ani-
mals that had aberrant electrocardiograms (Fig. 8).
Electrocardiography was utilized by Bohn et al. (1971)  
to investigate the effects of age, sex, and breed on canine 
atrial fibrillation, as well as the relationship between this 
condition and other underlying cardiac conditions and its 
prognostic importance. When diagnosing cardiac diseases 
in dogs, Taylor and Sittnikow (1968)  used auscultation, 
roentgenograms, and electrocardiograms. They discovered 
that while careful auscultation was the most important 
method, roentgenograms and electrocardiograms were the 
best for confirming a diagnosis of cardiac disease and gaug-
ing its severity. Electrocardiographic observations in Spitz, 
Doberman, Labrador, German Shepherd, and Mongrels 
were reported by Dhanapalan et  al. (1997) . They noticed 
breed differences in P wave and R wave amplitudes but 
not much in the QRS complex. According to Pereira et al. 
(2004), Cocker Spaniels with increased R wave amplitude, 
QRS duration, and deep Q wave in Lead II ECG were a 
good sign that they had cardiomyopathy (Figs. 9 and 10).
The ECG’s axis represents the main direction of the 
heart’s total electrical activity and serves as a crucial 
 diagnostic tool for cardiac disorders. The usual adult QRS 
FIG. 8 Pulmonary infiltration in an ECG of dog.

Diseases of cardiovascular system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 13  207
axis is leftward and downward, ranging from −30 degrees 
to +90 degrees. Left axis deviation is defined as the QRS 
axis deviating by 30–90 degrees (LAD). The QRS vector 
is pointed upward and to the left in this instance. Right 
axis deviation (RAD) is present if the QRS axis is between 
+90 and 180 degrees, or beyond +100 degrees if the adult 
range is considered. The QRS vector would point rightward 
and downward. Extreme axis deviation, in which the ven -
tricular vector is oriented upward and to the right, occurs 
when the QRS axis falls between −90 degrees and 180 de-
grees. Finally, if there is no prominent QRS deflection and 
the QRS complex is isoelectric or equiphasic in all leads, 
the axis is said to be ambiguous. Normal variation (physi -
ologic, frequently age-related change), left ventricular hy -
pertrophy, and conduction abnormalities such as left bundle 
branch block and left anterior fascicular block are some of 
the causes of LAD.
On the other hand, RAD could indicate a lung infection 
that has worsened, a tachycardia, a new high lateral MI (Qr 
pattern), or a pulmonary embolism ( Kashou and Kashou, 
2018). The diagnosis of heart illness also uses ambulatory 
electrocardiography (Holter monitoring and cardiac event 
recording) (Tilley et al., 2008).
3.4 Cardiac catheterization
Measurement of intracardiac pressure, blood oximetry, and 
selective angiocardiography are frequently included in the 
standard CC technique for the evaluation of congenital and 
acquired cardiac disorders. CC is most frequently used to 
treat congenital cardiac disorders (e.g., pulmonary stenosis 
or PDA). Advances in echocardiography have significantly 
decreased the necessity for routine CC for diagnosis (Tilley 
et al., 2008).
3.5 Echocardiography
The most adaptable imaging method for the investigation of 
heart disorders is echocardiography (Gugjoo et  al., 2014b, c, d;  
Bodh et al., 2016a ;). Through M-mode  echocardiography, 
which provides an image of the heart viewed during several 
cardiac cycles, a unidimensional perspective is obtained 
(Cornell et al., 2004). It is typically used to assess the linear 
cardiac dimensions of the major arteries and heart chamber 
walls. Body size and the diameters of the aorta, left atrial, 
left ventricular, septal, and posterior walls as well as the 
amplitude of motion in the mitral wall have been found 
to be significantly correlated (Lombard, 1984; Jacobs and 
Mahjoob, 1988; Della Torre et al., 2000).
Compared to body size and confirmation, body surface 
area closely correlates with echocardiographic parameters 
(Della Torre et al., 2000 ). In typical Beagle dogs, Crippa 
et al. (1992)  examined echocardiographic parameters and 
indices and discovered that in Beagles around 28  weeks 
old, the morphofunctional cardiac homogeneity is inde -
pendent of size and age. Boon (2011) performed M-mode 
echocardiography on 20 young, healthy dogs weighing 
between 9.8 and 28.6  kg and discovered statistically sig -
nificant correlations between body size and the dimen -
sions of the aortic, left atrial, left ventricular, septal, and 
posterior walls, as well as the amplitude of motion of the 
mitral valve.
In healthy dogs of several breeds, including Labrador 
retrievers and Indian Spitz, echocardiography has been used 
to standardize cardiac indices, and assess heart function 
(Gugjoo, 2011; Bodh, 2014). By comparing the left ventricu-
lar cavity dimensions, wall thickness, systolic time intervals, 
and fractional shortening of healthy, awake, non-exercising 
Greyhounds to previously reported normal echocardiographic 
values obtained from Mongrels and various other dog breeds, 
Snyder et al. (2005) found significant differences.
Congenital heart conditions like obstruction of the 
ventricular outflow, PDA, VSD, ASD, ToF, dysplasia of 
the mitral and tricuspid valves, and acquired heart con -
ditions like valvular disease, congestive (dilated) cardio -
myopathy (CCM), hypertrophic cardiomyopathy (HCM), 
pericardial effusion, etc., can all be evaluated using echo -
cardiography ( Bonagura, 1983 ; Gugjoo et  al., 2013c ; 
Bodh et al., 2014, 2016a ). It may be useful for assessing 
canines that already have pericardial illness. DCM can be 
identified using echocardiographic reference values since 
the values between ill and healthy dogs differ greatly 
(Koch et al., 1996 ).
FIG. 9 Placement of electrode in dogs.
FIG. 10 Placement of electrode in cats.

208 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
M-mode echocardiography was used by Rao et  al. 
(2008) to measure echocardiographic indices and they dis -
covered that it was a helpful method for identifying left ven-
tricular enlargement and impaired contractile performance 
in dogs with DCM. To assess the severity and prognosis of 
heart illness, evaluation of left ventricular diastolic function 
is crucial (Hori et al., 2008). In dogs with dilated cardiomy-
opathy, M-mode echocardiography is helpful for early and 
confirming the diagnosis as well as for quantifying the left 
ventricular dysfunction (Rao et al., 2008 ). Dogs with con -
gestive heart failure brought on by mitral valve disease were 
the subjects of baseline echocardiographic data reported by 
de Madron et al. (2011).
When combined with other diagnostic modalities, the 
M-mode echocardiograph is a useful diagnostic tool, ac -
cording to Gugjoo et al.’s (2014c, d) evaluation of numerous 
cardiac disorders and normal reference values in various 
dog breeds. A two-dimensional tomographic image of the 
various cardiac structures is produced via two-dimensional 
real-time ultrasonography (2D). This mode can be used to 
identify lesions such as cardiac tumors, pericardial effusion, 
valve anomalies, and heart size.
Standardized imaging planes and display formats for 
two-dimensional echocardiography in dogs and cats were 
advised by Thomas et  al. (1993) . He suggested the right 
parasternal site, the left caudal (apical) parasternal location, 
and the left cranial parasternal location as three transducer 
locations (windows) to obtain consistent imaging planes. 
Four two-dimensional echocardiographic methods for mea-
suring canine left atrial size were examined by Rishniw 
and Erb (2000) . At particular periods in the cardiac cycle, 
the left atrium was measured, and they discovered a sub -
stantial correlation between the LA’s size and body weight. 
Additionally, they gave 2D echocardiographic estimates of 
LA size in adult dogs together with echocardiographic data 
with reference intervals.
3.6 Doppler echocardiography (DE)
The three main varieties of DE are color Doppler (CD), 
continuous wave Doppler (CW-D), and pulse wave Doppler 
(PW-D). DE offers useful information on the hemodynamics 
of the heart, allowing any abnormality to be identified before 
any permanent anatomical or functional deformity occurs. 
Both the kind and the severity of heart disease can be deter-
mined. Blood flow is detected using the CD to determine di-
rection, PW-D to measure speed, and CW-D to detect more 
turbulent flow. Prior to the development of PW-D, mitral 
leaflet motion analysis using echocardiography was utilized 
to show poor early ventricular filling (Leischik et al., 2015).
When it comes to gathering physiological data on in -
tracardiac hemodynamics, DE has significant advantages 
over the currently employed invasive techniques. The most 
used method for directly analyzing diastolic function and 
indirectly analyzing atrial function is PWD, which was vali-
dated using invasive measures ( Appleton et al., 1994 ). By 
using Bernoulli’s approach, it is possible to determine from 
a measurement of the pressure gradient across a stenotic 
valve (Berger et al., 1984 ). Mean LA pressures and pres -
sure fluctuations are consistently correlated with mitral and 
pulmonary flow velocities (Appleton et al., 1994; Leischik 
et al., 2015). A number of complex parameters, such as left 
atrial pressure, relaxation, LV systolic pressure, ventricular 
suction, preload, heart rate, and atrial function, influence 
the mitral inflow velocity profile.
The pattern of LV filling defined by Doppler transmi -
tral flow has been extensively characterized in humans 
and validated in experimental dogs as a noninvasive 
method of assessing LV diastolic function ( Choong et al., 
1988). In five lightly sedated dogs, Appleton (1991)  
evaluated mitral flow velocity, mitral valve motion, and 
transmitral pressure gradient during 50 cardiac cycles of 
first- and second-degree atrioventricular block that were 
either spontaneous or atrial timed. They discovered that 
diastolic mitral regurgitation is a frequent finding that can 
be identified in patients with conduction problems using 
DE methods.
DE is useful for identifying DCM and mitral valve de -
generation in dogs, and it can be used to forecast chronic 
heart failure that results from both conditions ( Schober 
et al., 2010). The main discovery is that it makes it possible 
to quickly and effectively determine whether or not CHF is 
present. Additionally, the physical examination’s measure-
ment of respiratory rate was as effective in predicting CHF 
(Schober et al., 2010).
When a dog has degenerative mitral valve disease, the 
diagnosis of CHF is made by combining the clinical symp-
toms and the findings of multiple diagnostic tests, such as 
thoracic radiography, NT proBNP, or DE ( Chetboul et al., 
2009). With DE, it is possible to measure cardiac output 
and regurgitant volumes, quantify intracardiac shunts, and 
assess the systolic and diastolic function of the heart (Boon, 
2011). Although early stages of LV dysfunction are fre -
quently observed in healthy dogs older than 10  years or in 
asymptomatic dogs with heart disease, diastolic dysfunc -
tion significantly contributes to the pathogenesis and symp-
toms of a wide variety of cardiovascular illnesses (Schober 
and Fuentes, 2001).
Chetboul and Tissier (2003)  reviewed the reliability of 
traditional echo-Doppler testing in the diagnosis of canine 
MVD and the effects it has on cardiac remodeling, LV func-
tion, and blood pressure. They suggested several standard 
echo Doppler variables for asymptomatic dogs, mainly 
 including grading of MR severity, evaluation of pulmonary 
arterial pressures, assessment of filling pressures, and left 
heart changes using a planimetric method that may help in

Diseases of cardiovascular system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 13  209
predicting animals at risk for decomposition. They also sug-
gested serial echo Doppler examinations in dogs with MVD 
to identify and track these alterations over time and detect 
an ongoing worsening of the disease.
In dogs with mitral regurgitation, the degree of regur -
gitation is the primary determinant of left atrial size and 
disease severity ( Kittleson and Brown, 2012 ). Spectral or 
color flow Doppler ultrasound may be used to identify and 
quantify mitral regurgitation. The apical four-chamber view 
is where the regurgitant flow is most frequently oriented to 
the ultrasound beam. While color Doppler mapping is not 
accessible, spectral Doppler mapping can be utilized to lo -
cate the regurgitant jet. Systolic dysfunction, albeit uncom-
mon in small-breed dogs, can occur in myocardial infarcts 
and the last phases of chronic mitral valve insufficiency, 
where the influence of the insufficiency on contractile func-
tion may be reduced (Borgarelli et al., 2007).
Doppler echocardiographic measurements of pulmonary 
arterial pressure obtained from tricuspid or pulmonary re -
gurgitant jets are frequently used in the clinical diagnosis of 
pulmonary hypertension in dogs (Visser et al., 2016). Dogs 
may develop pulmonary hypertension as a primary condi -
tion or as a complication of a number of illnesses, such as 
pulmonary venous and left atrial hypertension, pulmonary 
thromboembolic disease, congenital cardiac abnormalities, 
such as reversed PDA, and chronic pulmonary diseases, 
such as chronic bronchitis or pulmonary fibrosis. These 
conditions include dirofilariasis, Cushing’s syndrome, and 
protein-losing nephropathy ( Bach et  al., 2006 ; Johnson, 
1996). In both human and veterinary medicine, severe pul -
monary hypertension has a bad prognosis since the underly-
ing reasons are not easily treatable ( Johnson et al., 1999 ; 
Kellum and Stepien, 2007).
Therefore, it is crucial in veterinary medicine to iden -
tify pulmonary hypertension early. Using Doppler echo -
cardiography and the modified Bernoulli equation applied 
to the peak velocity of tricuspid regurgitation or pulmo -
nary regurgitant flow, noninvasive prediction of PAP is 
possible ( Lee et al., 2015 ). To provide reference data for 
the diagnosis of various cardiac diseases in dogs, Doppler-
determined velocities and pressure gradients were mea -
sured in healthy Spitz and Labrador retriever dogs of 
various age groups.
3.7 Cardiac biomarker
A cardiac biomarker is a characteristic that, with the high -
est sensitivity and specificity feasible, can predict or di -
agnose heart disease, whether it is primary or secondary. 
Cardiovascular biomarkers are becoming more popular due 
to their efficiency, affordability, noninvasiveness, risk-free 
nature, quick turnaround time, and highly predictive testing. 
Aiming to further define the diagnostic facets of primary 
and secondary cardiac illnesses, numerous researchers have 
investigated various forms of cardiovascular markers during 
the past 30 years. The most thorough research in the veteri-
nary sector has been done on small animals, mostly dogs 
and cats.
N-terminal pro-BNP (NT-pro BNP), cardiac tropo -
nins I and T (cTnI and cTnT), atrial natriuretic peptide, 
endothelin, tumor necrosis factor (TNF), and C-reaction 
protein are currently the biomarkers with the highest 
predictability for cardiac diseases in veterinary clinical 
practice. These markers also show the greatest specific -
ity (Fonfara et al., 2010; Saunders et al., 2009 ). There has 
been a thorough examination of the structure, metabolism, 
application, reference values, and changes in various dis -
orders of troponin I and N-terminal proBNP in dogs and 
cats (Baisan et al., 2016 ).
Concentrations of specific enzymes and isoforms 
can be used to support the diagnosis of heart disorders 
since they show the continuous degenerative change. 
Immediately following any injury to a muscle or the 
heart, the quantity of creatine kinase in serum or plasma 
increases. By examining serial changes in serum creatine 
phosphokinase activity, Shell et al. (1971)  determined the 
extent of myocardial infarction in the conscious dog. They 
found that the method was suitable for determining infarct 
size over a wide range and for identifying changes in in -
farct size brought on by pharmacological and physiologi -
cal interventions.
When myocardial infarction occurred in eight conscious 
dogs, Hashimoto et al. (1985)  employed the concentration 
of plasma MM creatine kinase (CK) isoforms to detect it 
early. They discovered that the concentration of CKMM 
isoform increased right away. They come to the conclusion 
that plasma CKMM isoform quantification allows for the 
early detection of CK release indicative of infarction within 
1 h of the beginning of ischemia. In addition, biomarkers 
such as creatine kinase (CK) and its fraction CKMB are 
used to evaluate the heart function in various diseases or 
surgical procedures that cause myocardial damage, such as 
ischemia, myocardial necrosis, or percutaneous coronary 
intervention in humans (Apak et al., 2005).
This biomarker is generated upon damage to noncardiac 
muscles as well, making it nonspecific to myocardial tis -
sue. According to Apak et  al. (2005) , cardiac troponin T 
is a more accurate and sensitive indicator of myocardial 
damage than CK-MB. Despite this, the biomarkers should 
be considered in the context of the patient’s medical his -
tory, physical exam, and other diagnostic tests since they 
are not standalone examinations. The biomarkers discussed 
in this paper are the ones most frequently used to evaluate 
heart health and have the ability to diagnose the majority 
of diseases, although their reliability is still low and more 
research is needed (Baisan et al., 2016).

210 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
3.8 Treatment
The type of sickness should dictate the sort of treatment. 
Some congenital heart problems can be surgically fixed 
or rectified, while other disorders can be treated medi -
cally with one or more medications. For the management 
of inherited and acquired heart problems in dogs, cardiac 
surgery is becoming a more viable alternative. Compared 
to open cardiac repairs requiring cardiopulmonary bypass 
(CPB), which are now only carried out in a small number 
of specialized centers, other cardiac procedures are broadly 
available. While some cardiac procedures are solely consid-
ered palliative, others are conducted with the goal of curing 
the patient. Cardiac procedures included closed cardiac pro-
cedures, procedures carried out while the inflow occlusion 
was in place, and procedures carried out while using CPB.
The most popular form of treatment for canine dogs 
with symptomatic bradycardia is pacemaker therapy (Tilley 
et al., 2008). A low-sodium diet may be suggested for dogs 
with congestive heart failure to aid with the body’s fluid 
balance. The main objectives of treatment are to lessen 
heart muscle damage, prevent fluid buildup in the lungs, en-
hance circulation, control heart rate and rhythm, make sure 
that the blood is sufficiently oxygenated, and reduce the 
danger of blood clot development. Adult heartworms and 
larvae should be eradicated in cases of heartworm disease. 
In the end, success is defined as the resolution of symptoms, 
normal resting breathing and heart rate, and good quality of 
life for the dog.
3.9 Common drugs used
Heart disease in dogs can be treated with a wide variety of 
drugs. Furosemide, a diuretic, is a staple of treatment for 
canines with congestive heart failure (CHF) brought either 
by dilated cardiomyopathy or degenerative mitral valve dis-
ease (DMVD) (DCM). It improves urine production and 
is a crucial and efficient way to get rid of fluids that build 
up in dogs with cardiac issues. When a dog is experienc -
ing a heart failure crisis, using a diuretic may be lifesaving. 
Digoxin, a digitalis glycoside medication, increases the force 
of heart muscle contraction, slows the heart rate, and im -
proves the function of blood pressure receptors. The renin– 
angiotensin–aldosterone system (RAAS), which encourages 
fluid retention, vasoconstriction, and myocardial and vascu-
lar remodeling, is typically activated in severe heart disease.
In dogs with CHF, the use of ACE inhibitors (enalapril, 
benazepril, ramipril, and lisinopril) is linked to increased 
survival and quality of life. They can lower blood pressure, 
boost cardiac output, and stop blood from flowing backward 
due to a leaking heart valve ( Oyama, 2009). Pimobendan 
is a positive inotrope that works differently from conven -
tional inotropes like digoxin to promote contractility. This 
has the benefit of increasing contractility without signifi -
cantly raising myocardial oxygen demand. This simultane -
ous “inodilating” activity, which relaxes vascular smooth 
muscle and causes mild arterial vasodilation, is exceptional. 
Additionally, it increases a dog’s chance of surviving and 
quality of life, and it probably does the same for a dog with 
DMVD or DCM (Boswood, 2010).
As it widens arteries leading to the lungs, sildenafil is a 
drug first developed and used to treat heart-related chest dis-
comfort and pulmonary arterial hypertension. Additionally, 
it helps men with erectile dysfunction. Other kinds of medi-
cations can help breathing by bolstering the respiratory 
system’s muscles. Some drugs are prescribed to reduce or 
speed up heart rate, regulate arrhythmias, and avoid blood 
clots.
Included in the management of cardiac arrhythmias is: 
Mexiletine or atropine are common medications used to treat 
sinus arrhythmia. Digoxin and perhaps extended-release 
Diltiazem control atrial fibrillation. Theophylline or prop -
antheline are effective treatments for atrioventricular block. 
A pacemaker is occasionally required to be implanted surgi-
cally. In breeds prone to this illness, ventricular tachycardia 
(VT) may be treated with antiarrhythmic medicine. If the 
dog has acute VT, medications such as lidocaine, sotalol, 
and mexiletine may be administered.
Mexiletine or sotalol are used as medications for pre -
mature beat ( Cunningham and Roderick, 2019 ). In some 
instances, drugs are used to kill parasites in the circulatory 
system, such as heartworms. By giving enough calories and 
protein and controlling the production of cytokines, one can 
manage the potential causes of decreased appetite, such as 
pharmaceutical side effects, in dogs with cardiac issues. 
Coenzyme Q10 (CoQ10), vitamin E (as alpha-tocopherol), 
l-carnitine, taurine, and fish oil (omega-3 fatty acids) have 
all been studied specifically for their potential to prevent 
and treat a variety of heart conditions in dogs.
B vitamins and magnesium are two more supplements 
with promising early research that need further examination. 
Clear evidence for the effectiveness of several supplements 
on canine heart disease has been established by clinical 
observation and interventional trials with dogs of different 
breeds. Appropriate quantities of some dietary components 
have been demonstrated to prolong life, enhance life quality, 
lessen disease symptoms and physical signs, and lower mor-
tality rates in these animals (Dove, 2001). Stem cell therapy 
for heart conditions is a developing field (Saxena, 2014).
Puppies’ deciduous tooth stem cells (pDSCs) were used 
in a trial with numerous intravenous injections to treat dogs 
with valvular heart disease ( Petchdee and Sompeewong, 
2016). It has yet to be determined whether stem cell ther -
apy has the full potential to treat canine cardiac disease 
(Rajewski, 2017). Cardiovascular disease gene therapy is 
the cutting edge of novel therapeutic possibilities, and with

Diseases of cardiovascular system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 13  211
further research and thorough testing, it may set the stan -
dard for initial clinical treatment options ( Wolfram and 
Donahue, 2013).

212 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Diseases of cardiovascular system of dogs and cats  Chapter | 13  213

215

Chapter 14
Diseases of reproductive system of female 
dogs and cats
1 Diseases of ovary
1.1 Ovarian cyst
Cysts were defined as fluid-filled structures with a distinct 
wall that develop within the ovary (ovarian cyst) or near 
the ovary (par-ovarian cyst) ( Johnston et  al., 2001a ). The 
survey indicated that ovarian cyst was the most common 
ovarian pathology (80%) ( Dow, 1960), and the most com -
mon type of ovarian cyst was the follicular cyst ( Maya-
Pulgarin et  al., 2017 ; Knauf et  al., 2018 ; Farghali et  al., 
2020). Follicular structures of more than 8 mm in diameter 
present on the ovary prior to ovulation (during proestrus or 
estrus) or follicles of any size present post-ovulation (dur -
ing late estrus, diestrus, or anestrus) are considered follicu-
lar cysts ( Johnston et al., 2001a ). Follicular cysts may be 
single or multiple, may be unilateral or bilateral, and may 
be endocrinologically active or inactive ( Johnston et  al., 
2001a; Kumar et al., 2019). The other cystic ovarian struc-
tures reported in dogs and cats are luteal cysts, germinal 
cysts, cystic corpora lutea, cystic rete ovarii, cystic atretic 
follicles, and cystic granulosa cell tumors ( Johnston et al., 
2001a; Smith, 2003 ). Most of these cysts are hormonally 
inactive and have no clinical relevance ( Arlt and Haimerl, 
2016). The functional significance of these cysts is minimal 
unless they compress or destroy the adjacent ovarian archi-
tecture (Ortega-Pacheco et al., 2012).
1.1.1 Occurrence
Follicular cysts are common incidental findings in older 
bitches and queens (Ortega-Pacheco et al., 2012) with lower 
incidence in bitches than in queens (Smith, 2003). No breed 
predisposition has been found ( Johnston et  al., 2001a ). 
Follicular cysts, commonly arise from mature or atretic fol-
licles due to ineffective ovulatory mechanism that results in 
the persistence of follicles (Smith, 2003). The follicular cyst 
may be partially luteinized ( Smith, 2003). Follicular cysts 
may be functionally active due to their ability of secreting 
estrogen and can produce estrogen-mediated effects on the 
animal’s reproductive tract and extra reproductive systems 
(Johnston et al., 2001a). Follicular cysts could cause behav-
ioral disorders like prolonged estrus, bone marrow suppres-
sion, and uterine hyperplasia due to prolonged elevation of 
estradiol (Farghali et al., 2020).
1.1.2 Clinical manifestation
Affected cats and dogs may be asymptomatic or clinically 
healthy if the cysts are nonfunctional or produce very less 
amount of estrogen that could influence the animal’s behav-
ior and physiology. Ovarian and par-ovarian cysts often are 
accidental findings during ultrasonographic examination or 
abdominal surgery (usually routine OHE) in healthy bitches 
and queens (Ortega-Pacheco et al., 2012; Smith, 2003). The 
most common clinical sign exhibited by cats and dogs af -
fected with follicular cysts is irregular estrus cycles specially 
prolonged proestrus or estrus, when the cells lining secrete 
estrogen ( Keskin et  al., 2009 ). The physical changes as -
sociated with proestrus and estrus such as vulvar swelling 
and serosanguineous vulvar discharge are present (Johnston 
et  al., 2001a ). Prolonged anestrus and infertility are the 
other complaints associated with ovarian cysts. In chronic 
cases, symmetrical bilateral alopecia, bone marrow suppres-
sion, and cystic endometrial hyperplasia (CEH)/pyometra 
complex can occur due to prolonged elevation of estradiol 
(Ortega-Pacheco et al., 2012; Lopate and Foster, 2010).
1.1.3 Diagnosis
The diagnosis is based on behavioral signs, vaginal cytol -
ogy, hormone assays, ultrasonography, and histopathol -
ogy (Ortega-Pacheco et al., 2012 ; Eissa et al., 2017 ). The 
presence of cornified vaginal epithelial cells in vaginal 
cytological examination indicates an estrogenic influence. 
Serial measurement of estrogen in serum may be useful in

216 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
diagnosing follicular cyst in cats and dogs. The serum es -
trogen concentration of greater than 20 pg/mL is consistent 
with follicular activity. Therefore, prolonged proestrus or 
estrus along with persistently increased serum concentra -
tions of estrogen is indicative of chronic estrogen produc -
tion and this is most likely to be a follicular cyst in cats and 
dogs (Smith, 2003). Ultrasonography is the best way for the 
diagnosis of ovarian cysts in cats and dogs ( Smith, 2003). 
Ultrasonographic examination of ovaries will reveal one or 
more large follicles as hypoechoic to anechoic structures 
depending on the presence of the amount of luteal tissue 
(Ortega-Pacheco et  al., 2012 ). Histologic examination of 
ovarian cysts can be beneficial for the distinction between 
follicular cysts and cysts arising in the rete ovarii, par-
ovarian cysts, or subsurface epithelial structures ( Ortega-
Pacheco et al., 2012).
1.1.4 Therapy
Ovario-hysterectomy is the treatment of choice for ovar -
ian follicular cysts ( Johnston et  al., 2001a ). Ovario-
hysterectomy eliminates the risk of recurrence of the 
disease and severe concomitant metropathies (Sontas et al., 
2011a). Hormonal therapy may be an acceptable alterna -
tive to the ovariohysterectomy ( Knauf et  al., 2013 ) that 
includes the administration of GnRH and/or hCG to lutein-
ize the granulosa cell layer ( Lopate and Foster, 2010 ). In 
bitches, hormonal treatment regimes suggested are a single 
injection of GnRH (50–100 μg, I/M) or a single injection of 
hCG (100–1000 IU, I/M) or injection of hCG (500 IU, I/M) 
once daily for three consecutive days, or injection of hCG 
(1000 IU, half of which is administered I/V and remain -
ing half as S/C). If luteinization and a decrease in clinical 
signs have not occurred by 1  week after the hormonal re -
gime, treatment with GnRH or hCG can be repeated (Smith, 
2003). In queens, 25  μg of GnRH (I/M) or hCG (500 I/V 
once or 250 I/V on 2 consecutive days) will stimulate the 
formation of luteal tissue ( Smith, 2003). Variable success 
rates of hormonal treatment have been reported (Arlt et al., 
2011; Knauf et al., 2013 ). As the cats are induced ovula -
tors, the induction of ovulation can be achieved by allowing 
breeding in cats (Ortega-Pacheco et al., 2012). Aspiration of 
cystic fluid via laparotomy in the way described by Fayrer-
Hosken et  al. (1992)  or ultrasound-guided aspiration of 
cysts (Bassu et al., 2004 ) could be the other treatment op -
tions. Spontaneous regression of the cysts may also occur 
(Arlt and Haimerl, 2016). For the treatment of luteal cysts, 
serial PGF2α administration or ovariectomy has been sug -
gested (Lopate and Foster, 2010).
1.2 Ovarian remnant syndrome
Ovarian remnant syndrome (ORS) is a condition that occurs 
when functional ovarian tissue remains inside the body after 
ovariectomy or ovariohysterectomy (Wallace, 1991). It is an 
iatrogenic condition commonly seen in the bitch and queen 
(Wallace, 1991). Ovarian remnant syndrome is less com -
mon in dogs than in cats (Miller, 1995).
1.2.1 Occurrence
ORS may occur due to surgical error (incomplete removal 
of one or both ovarian tissues during ovariectomy or ovar -
iohysterectomy), ectopic ovarian tissue (localized in the 
broad ligament or proper ligament of the ovary), or auto-
transplantation (drooping of some ovarian tissue into the 
abdominal cavity) at the time of ovariectomy or ovariohys-
terectomy (Ball et al., 2010; Sontas et al., 2007). Due to the 
revascularization of the retained piece of ovarian tissue, it 
becomes functional and starts to produce estrogen and pro-
gesterone hormones that results in developing the signs of 
ORS (Kalina et al., 2017; Smith, 2003 ). Surgical error has 
been considered the most acceptable cause of ORS (Sontas 
et al., 2007), and may occur due to a small abdominal wall 
incision that makes it difficult to visualize, reach, and carry 
out the ligature of the ovary or ovaries, or due to improper 
ligation of ovarian tissues ( Ball et al., 2010; Kalina et al., 
2017). The right ovary is more predisposed to be the rem -
nant in the dog and cat due to its anatomical location ( Ball 
et al., 2010; Sontas et al., 2007).
1.2.2 Clinical manifestation
In dogs, the symptoms develop are characteristics of pro-
oestrus and oestrus such as vulvar swelling, mucoid to se -
rosanguinous vulvar discharge with behavioral symptoms 
of estrus like attractiveness to males and postural behav -
ior ( Johnston et  al., 2001a; Naiman et  al., 2014 ). Many 
bitches only have one or two of these symptoms. Signs in 
queens may include vocalization, affectionate head rub -
bing to owners, rolling, treading, lordosis, and attraction 
of males (Smith, 2003; Oliveira et al., 2012). However, all 
the queens with ORS do not show overt behavioral signs 
of estrus (Oliveira et al., 2012). In ORS, the onset of signs 
of estrus in cats and dogs may occur as early as a few days 
or as late as many years after OHE ( Miller, 1995; Smith, 
2003). False pregnancy and mammary gland development 
may be other reported clinical signs. False pregnancy asso-
ciated with ORS is more common in bitches than in queens 
(Smith, 2003).
1.2.3 Diagnosis
If an ovariohysterectomized/ovariectomized cat or dog 
shows symptoms of estrus behavior, it should be suspected 
for ORS. Diagnosis of ORS relies on history and clinical 
signs, and can be further by laboratory tests like vaginal 
cytology and hormonal analysis and/or laparotomy (Miller, 
1995; Feldman and Nelson, 2004).
In spayed dogs where proestrus or estrus symptoms, 
such as vulvar swelling and discharge, and willingness to

Diseases of reproductive system of female dogs and cats  Chapter | 14  217
stand, are apparent, the diagnosis can be simply made by 
vaginal cytology ( Oliveira et al., 2012 ). Predominant cor -
nified vaginal epithelial cells are indicative of elevated se -
rum estrogen concentrations and the presence of functional 
ovarian tissue (Johnston et al., 2001a).
In cats, vaginal cytological changes are more subtle than 
in bitches; therefore, in cats diagnosis is more dependent 
on a combination of clinical signs, hormonal assays, and 
laparotomy (Miller, 1995). However, an increased number 
of cornified vaginal epithelial cells and a distinct lessening 
of background mucus and debris represent estrogenic influ-
ences on the vaginal mucosa in cats (Smith, 2003).
The levels of progesterone and estradiol indicate the 
presence of ovarian tissue in cats and dogs ( Oliveira et al., 
2012). Serum progesterone concentration measurements 
are more specific than serum estradiol concentrations to di-
agnose ORS, as the ovary is the sole source of progesterone 
(Wallace, 1991). Evaluation of serum progesterone concen-
trations can be done 1–2 weeks after confirming the vagi -
nal cytology results. A serum progesterone concentration of 
greater than 2  ng/mL indicates the presence of functional 
luteal tissue on the ovarian remnant. If the bitch is showing 
signs of heat, luteinization of the follicle may be induced by 
administrating 50 μg of GnRH (I/M) or hCG (400  IU IV or 
1000 IU, half IV , half IM). Re-evaluation of serum proges-
terone concentration 2–3 weeks after injection of GnRH or 
hCG is done for verification of luteinization (Smith, 2003). 
Post-stimulation serum progesterone concentrations greater 
than 2 ng/mL are strong evidence of the presence of ovarian 
luteal tissue.
As cats are induced ovulaters, ovulation can be induced 
by copulation, manual stimulation, or administration of ex-
ogenous GnRH or hCG. Administration of GnRH (25  μg, 
I/M) or hCG (250  IU I/M) can stimulate ovulation of fol -
licles, formation of corpora lutea, and subsequently in -
crease in serum progesterone concentrations. The serum 
progesterone concentrations remain greater than 2  ng/mL 
for approximately 35–50  days after ovulation that indicate 
the presence of functional ovarian tissue. The serum pro -
gesterone should be measured 2–3  weeks after injection of 
GnRH or hCG (Smith, 2003).
A serum estradiol concentration greater than 20  pg/mL 
indicates follicular activity in bitches and queens. A single-
sample result may be inconclusive or produce an incorrect 
diagnosis as the serum estradiol concentrations are not 
consistent with the follicular activity ( Ball et al., 2010 ). In 
bitches, serum estrogen level increases during proestrus, 
reaches at peak toward the end of estrus, and rapidly de -
creases during estrus (standing estrus). Similarly, cats con -
tinue to display behavioral signs of estrus for a few days 
after serum estradiol concentrations decrease (Smith, 2003).
Another highly effective test for determining the pres -
ence of ovarian tissue in cats and dogs is the hormone assay 
for anti-Mullerian hormone (AMH). Therefore, a positive 
test for AMH would indicate the presence of ovarian tissue 
because ovaries are the sole source of AMH ( Place et al., 
2011; Yilmaz et al., 2015).
The diagnosis of ORS in bitches or queens using ultra -
sonography may be difficult and depends on the expertise 
of the examiner, the stage of the estrous cycle of the animal 
at the time of examination, and the size of the remnant tis -
sue (Ball et al., 2010 ). The ultrasonographic examination 
may miss residual tissue if it is quite small or if the animal 
is in anestrus ( Sontas et  al., 2007 ). Exploratory surgery 
may be a diagnostic option that enables a thorough exami -
nation of the ovarian pedicles and abdominal structures 
(Smith, 2003).
1.2.4 Therapy
Surgical removal of the ovarian remnant by exploratory lap-
arotomy is the treatment of choice ( Johnston et al., 2001a; 
Sontas et  al., 2007 ). Exploratory laparotomy in cats and 
bitches is performed either during estrus or during diestrus 
phases; during both the stages ovarian remnant is more vis-
ible because of an increase in the size due to the presence 
of the follicles or corpora lutea, respectively. However, due 
to the increased vascularity of the remnants during these 
phases, intraoperative bleeding could be a complication 
during the surgery. The intraoperative bleeding will be less 
during the diestrus phase than the estrus; however, signs 
of false pregnancy may develop postoperatively, and those 
usually subside without treatment in less than 4  weeks 
(Johnston et al., 2001a; Feldman and Nelson, 2004; Sontas 
et al., 2007). In cats, if the surgery is to be done during di -
estrus, the cat should be administered GnRH or hCG during 
behavioral estrus (Smith, 2003). Laparotomy is not advised 
during the anestrus phase of the estrus cycle in affected 
bitches or cats because the ovarian remnant tissue might be 
too small to be identified during this phase ( Smith, 2003; 
Sontas et  al., 2007). A thorough examination of the peri -
toneal cavity is necessary during the surgery, exploring the 
caudal poles of kidneys, the omentum, and the peritoneal 
walls, as these are common sites for the presence of the rem-
nant (Miller, 1995; Wallace, 1991; DeNardo et al., 2001 ). 
Both ovarian pedicles should be examined as remnants may 
occur bilaterally. Ovarian tissue should be excised carefully 
and submitted for histopathologic examination. If an ovar -
ian tissue is not identified, scar tissue should be removed at 
both ovarian pedicles (Johnston et al., 2001a). Postoperative 
serum progesterone levels assessment can be helpful to 
evaluate the success of the surgery.
As medical treatment of ORS, exogenous progestogens 
such as megestrol acetate or androgens like mibolerone 
have been reported ( Johnston et  al., 2001a ; Feldman and 
Nelson, 2004 ; Romagnoli, 2004 ). These compounds can 
inhibit the signs of ORS but do not solve the problem per -
manently and have adverse side effects; therefore, the use 
of these compounds is not recommended. The side effects

218 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
include increasing the incidence of mammary gland tumors, 
induction of growth hormone secretion and promotion of 
acromegaly condition, and suppression of adreno-cortical 
function (Oliveira et al., 2012).
1.3 Ovarian neoplasia
Ovarian neoplasms are uncommon in dogs and cats. The 
reported incidence of ovarian neoplasm ranges from 1% to 
6% in dogs and 0.7% to 3.6% in cats ( Klein, 2007; Sforna 
et al., 2003 ). However, the true incidence of ovarian neo -
plasia is unknown and may be biased by the fact that a 
large segment of the population is surgically neutered at an 
early age (Klein, 2007). Breeds such as German Shepherds, 
Terriers, Yorkshire, English Bulldogs, and Boxers have 
been found to be at higher risk of developing ovarian tumors 
(Bhoi et al., 2022).
1.3.1 Occurrence
Ovarian tumors occur most often in middle-aged to older 
cats and dogs; however, granulosa teratomas generally de -
velop in younger animals ( Klein, 2007 ). Approximately 
85% of ovarian tumors are unilateral ( Smith, 2003 ). The 
pathogenesis of ovarian neoplasia is unknown ( Johnston 
et  al., 2001a). Ovarian neoplasms are almost of primary 
ovarian origin and may arise from surface epithelium, sex 
cord-gonadostromal tissue, germ cells, or mesenchymal tis-
sues (Smith, 2003).
The tumors that arise from ovarian surface epithelium 
are papillary adenomas, papillary carcinomas, cystadeno -
mas, and cystadenocarcinomas. The epithelial tumors are 
common in dogs (40%–50% of reported canine ovarian neo-
plasms) and mostly are bilateral (Smith, 2003). Ovarian epi-
thelial tumors may be cauliflower-like or smooth, and may 
or may not be cystic ( Jergens and Shaw, 1987 ; Madewell 
and Theilen, 1987). Metastasis in epithelial tumors may oc-
cur (Klein, 2007; Smith, 2003 ). Epithelial tumors are ex -
tremely rare in the cat (Klein, 2007).
Granulosa cell tumor, thecoma, and luteoma are the 
tumors that arise from sex cord-gonadostromal tissue. 
Granulosa cell tumors are the second most commonly occur-
ring ovarian tumors in dogs (Johnston et al., 2001a). These 
tumors are usually unilateral and metastasis apparently is 
uncommon (Smith, 2003). In cats, sex cord- gonadostromal 
tumors are the most commonly occurring ovarian tumors. 
Of these, granulosa cell tumors are the most common, and 
half of them are malignant in nature ( Klein, 2007; Stein, 
1981; Norris et al., 1969).
The tumors that arise from germ cells are dysgermi -
nomas and teratomas. Dysgerminomas are the third most 
commonly occurring ovarian neoplasms (6%–12% of all 
ovarian neoplasms) in dogs and are generally unilateral 
(Smith, 2003). In cats, approximately 15% of ovarian neo -
plasms are dysgerminomas, and teratomas are reported 
rarely (Klein, 2007; Stein, 1981; Norris et al., 1969). Germ 
cell tumors specially teratomas have malignant potential, 
particularly in older animals.
Mesenchymal tumors are rare in dogs and cats. These 
include leiomyomas, fibromas neurofibromas, myomas, 
hemangiomas, and lymphangiomas (Smith, 2003).
1.3.2 Clinical manifestation
The dogs and cats affected with ovarian tumors may appear 
normal, may show a wide range of clinical signs, or may be 
critically ill. Small tumors may be inapparent. Many ovar -
ian neoplasms are functional and produce excessive estro -
gens and/or progestogens that lead to hormone-dependent 
changes. The affected animals may be suffered from nym -
phomania, prolonged estrus, swelling of the vulva, sanguin-
eous vulvar discharge, symmetric nonpruritic alopecia, and 
a pendulous abdomen ( Klein, 2007; Smith, 2003 ). Some 
bitches may have clinical signs of hyperadrenocorticism. 
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia/pyometra complex may de-
velop and the bitches may be lethargic and may develop 
polyuria, polydipsia, and inappetence. Certain nonspe -
cific symptoms such as anemia, inappetence, weight gain/
loss, gynecomastia, and receptivity to males may develop 
(Diez-Bru et al., 1998 ; Klein, 2007; Novotny et al., 2011 ; 
Abraham and Ravindran, 2012). In cats also, persistent es -
trus, alopecia, and cystic or adenomatous hyperplasia of the 
endometrium, signs of depression, vomiting, abdominal 
distension, and ascites are the associate signs (Klein, 2007). 
Animals with malignant tumors that have metastasized may 
have systemic signs of disease (Smith, 2003).
1.3.3 Diagnosis
Diagnosis of ovarian tumor is based on clinical findings, ra-
diographic, ultrasonographic, or histological examination, 
or a combination of these techniques (Bhoi et al., 2022). The 
clinical findings depend on the space occupied by intraab -
dominal tumor mass, hormonal disturbances caused by the 
tumor, and metastasis spread of the tumor (Itoh et al., 2007). 
Abdominal palpation may be helpful in palpating an abdom-
inal mass or intra-abdominal fluid accumulation in bitches 
and queens affected with ovarian neoplasia (Smith, 2003).
Abdominal radiography may be helpful to identify ovar-
ian masses. In radiographs, ovarian neoplasms are visible as 
soft tissue density masses caudal to the kidney, displacing 
abdominal structures (Root and Spaulding, 1994). However, 
definitive diagnosis is difficult by radiography.
Ultrasonography is the most useful technique to make 
a tentative diagnosis of ovarian neoplasia in bitches and 
queens (Smith, 2003). Ovarian tumors are visible by ultra -
sonography as rounded or irregular masses with variable 
or polylocular echotexture, caudal to the kidney ( Root and 
Spaulding, 1994). Abdominal radiography and ultrasonog -
raphy can also be helpful to assess the tumor size and its

Diseases of reproductive system of female dogs and cats  Chapter | 14  219
location. Apart from radiography and ultrasonography, a 
definitive diagnosis is only made by histological examina -
tion of the ovarian tissue (Silva et al., 2014).
As supportive evidence, vaginal cytologic examina -
tion and serum hormone analyses may be conducted in the 
bitches and queens showing signs of prolonged heat (Smith, 
2003). In critically ill animals, hematologic and serum bio-
chemical analyses should be performed to analyze the sta -
tus of the animal and provide supportive therapy.
1.3.4 Therapy
A complete ovariohysterectomy is the most preferred 
treatment for ovarian neoplastic cases in bitches and cats. 
A complete ovariohysterectomy is recommended consid -
ering the risk of metastasis and future uterine pathology 
(Johnston et  al., 2001a ; Bhoi et  al., 2022; Smith, 2003 ). 
The excised ovarian and uterine tissues should be submit -
ted for histologic examination. If metastasis is suspected, 
the area lymph nodes should be removed and submitted for 
histologic examination. Medical treatment against ovar -
ian neoplasms is not effective. Chemotherapy and radia -
tion therapy have been reported to be little effective against 
primary ovarian tumors. However, chemotherapeutics, like 
cisplatin, can be effectively used in case of metastases from 
an ovarian tumor (Smith, 2003).
2 Diseases of uterus
Diseases of canine and feline uteri fall primarily into two 
categories: (i) abnormalities of endometrial growth and re -
pair and (ii) uterine infections with associated endometritis 
(Schlafer, 2012). Neoplastic conditions of the tubular geni-
talia of the bitch, with the possible exception of leiomyomas 
(tumors that arise from smooth muscle cells), are uncom -
mon (Hagman, 2022). Uterine neoplasia is seemingly rare 
in cats (Stabenfeldt and Pedersen, 1991). Congenital abnor-
malities involving the uterus are relatively rare ( McIntyre 
et al., 2010). The most common problems are described.
2.1 Cystic endometrial hyperplasia pyometra 
complex
Cystic endometrial hyperplasia-pyometra complex 
(CEH-P) is an acute or chronic, poly-systemic, and poten -
tially life-threatening condition that affects middle-aged or 
older female dogs and cats ( Hagman, 2022). It is the most 
common uterine disorder encountered in bitches ( Bigliardi 
et  al., 2004; Kida et  al., 2006 ) that is usually diagnosed 
within 4 months of estrus ( Hagman, 2022). The disease is 
characterized by progressive pathological changes that oc -
cur in the uterine lining and set up of bacterial infection in 
the uterus that lead to the development of several clinical 
signs (De Bosschere et al., 2001; Kustritz and Barber, 2003; 
Agudelo, 2005).
2.1.1 Occurrence
CEH-P is a disease of middle-aged or older dogs ( Hagman 
et  al., 2014 ). CEH-P is a diestrual disorder of the adult 
ovary-intact bitches (Arora et al., 2006). The overall portion 
of female dogs that experienced pyometra was around 19% 
(Jitpean et al., 2012 ) to 30% ( Egenvall et al., 2001; Nagar 
et  al., 2008). In cats, the disease is relatively uncommon 
(Hagman et al., 2014 ). This is believed to depend on less 
progesterone dominance due to seasonality and induced 
ovulation (Hagman, 2022). CEH and pyometra can develop 
in nulliparous bitches and queens ( Kustritz and Barber, 
2003; Agudelo, 2005).
2.1.2 Etiology and pathogenesis
The development of CEH-P is believed to be similar in dogs 
and cats (Hagman, 2022 ). The etiology of CEH-P is com -
plex and poorly understood but involves both hormonal 
and bacterial factors in the development ( De Bosschere 
et  al., 2001; Hagman, 2022 ). Higher circulating proges -
terone is thought to mediate the development of CEH-P. 
Higher progesterone causes hyperplasia of the endome -
trium, especially of the superficial epithelium and the en -
dometrial glands, increases endometrial gland secretion, 
favors cervical closure, and suppresses myometrial con -
tractions ( Cox, 1970 ). The local leukocyte response and 
uterine resistance to bacterial infection also remain sup -
pressed under the influence of progesterone ( Wijewardana 
et  al., 2015; Hagman, 2018 ). Thus, prolonged exposure 
to progesterone leads to proliferation and cystic dilation 
of the glandular endometrium with fluid accumulation in 
the uterine lumen, and the development of CEH ( Hagman, 
2022). Sterile fluid may accumulate in the uterine lumen, 
with or without CEH, which is defined as hydrometra or 
mucometra or, more rarely, hemometra, depending on the 
type of fluid and its mucin content ( Hagman, 2022 ). In 
bitches, the severity of CEH increases with repeated es -
trous cycles because of the prolonged diestrus that follows 
every estrus. In cats, the development of CEH is influ -
enced by the retention of functional corpora lutea and may 
be seen after induction of ovulation without subsequent 
pregnancy (Kustritz and Barber, 2003 ).
The development of CEH allows opportunistic bacteria 
to colonize the cystic endometrial tissue. Over the time, 
the presence of bacteria triggers an inflammatory response 
that results in the accumulation of purulent exudate within 
the uterus and leads to the subsequent development of 
pyometra (Hagman, 2022). CEH-P may establish from an 
ascending infection from the vagina. The most commonly 
reported infection is Escherichia coli, other infections such 
as Staphylococci, Streptococci, and Pseudomonas aerugi-
nosa may also occur ( Agudelo, 2005; Arora et al., 2006 ). 
Some reports show that estrogens also influence the devel -
opment of pyometra (Johnston et al., 2001b). The estrogen

220 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
hormone causes an increase in progesterone receptors in 
the  endometrium, dilation of the cervix, allows bacterial 
ascent that reside as the normal vaginal flora and influence 
endometrial changes ( Agudelo, 2005). CEH develops as a 
result of repeated exposure of the estrogen-primed uterus 
to progesterone (Kustritz and Barber, 2003). Administration 
of high doses of estrogen and progesterone for prolonged 
intervals, uterine biopsies, uterine scarification, and uter -
ine irritants has also been found to be responsible for CEH 
development ( Nomura, 1994; Noakes et  al., 2001; De 
Bosschere et al., 2002).
2.1.3 Clinical manifestation
The clinical signs of the CEH-P complex may vary and 
depend on the severity of the disease. Generally, early 
stage of CEH is asymptomatic when there is no bacte -
rial infection in the uterus ( Fransson et al., 2004; Hagman 
et al., 2006 ). As the condition progresses to pyometra, the 
affected animal may show some common clinical signs. 
The most commonly observed clinical finding is a continu-
ous or intermittent muco-purulent to hemorrhagic vaginal 
discharge ( Jhonson, 1994; Harvey, 1998; Johnston et  al., 
2001b; Kustritz and Barber, 2003 ), occurring in around 
75% of the cases ( Lucas et al., 2000 ). However, the vagi -
nal discharge is absent in dogs with a closed-cervix pyo -
metra ( Davidson, 1995 ) and may not be observed in cats 
due to the careful cleaning habits of the queens (Macintire, 
1994; V on Reitzeinstein et  al., 2000 ). The systemic ill -
ness is often more severe in the closed cervix pyometra, 
and the uterus may become severely distended ( Jitpean 
et al., 2017 ). Nonspecific clinical signs include anorexia, 
vomiting, lethargy, abdominal pain on palpation, loss of  
weight, abnormal mucous membranes (pale, hyperemic, 
or toxic), and an unkempt appearance ( Jhonson, 1994; 
Barsanti, 1998; Kustritz and Barber, 2003; Jitpean et al., 
2014). Polyuria and polydipsia are not readily observed in 
cats as often as in dogs and have been reported only in 9% 
of the cases (Jhonson, 1994; Barsanti, 1998 ).
2.1.4 Diagnosis
The diagnosis of CEH-P complex is based on a combina -
tion of clinical signs, physical examination, and diagnostic 
tests. Complete blood count (CBC), serum biochemistry 
profile, radiography, ultrasonography, and vaginal cytol -
ogy are the commonly used diagnostic tests ( Hagman, 
2018, 2022 ). A detailed medical history of the patient 
may include whelping history; prior hormonal treatment 
(estrogen or progestogen) for estrus suppression or in -
duction, contraception, or pregnancy termination; time 
duration elapsed since completion of the most recent 
estrus; and antecedents of irregular cycling ( Agudelo, 
2005), followed by a thorough physical examination. 
Special attention should be given to the  reproductive 
history,  presence of vaginal discharge. Abdominal pal -
pation will be helpful to evaluate uterine enlargement 
(Hagman, 2022 ). Routine laboratory tests such as CBC, 
biochemical profile, and urinalysis can provide valuable 
information about the overall health status of the animal 
(Hagman, 2022 ). Increased white blood cell count (leuko -
cytosis with neutrophilia and left deviation with values, 
and monocytosis) and changes in biochemical parameters 
may indicate the presence of infection ( Johnston et  al., 
2001b). Hyperglobulinemia can be found in 30%–60% 
of the cases. Hyperproteinemia and hyperfibrinogenemia 
can be observed due to dehydration or inflammatory pro -
cess (Barsanti, 1998; Agudelo, 2005 ).
Radiography and ultrasonography are commonly used 
imaging techniques to assess the size of the uterus and de -
tect abnormalities. Radiography can confirm the uterine 
enlargement and can identify a uterus that emerges from 
the pelvis as a dilated, homogeneous, and sometimes sac -
culiform structure (Fig. 1) with dorsal and cranial displace-
ment of the small intestine (Owens and Biery, 1999; Thrall, 
2004). Ultrasonography is particularly useful in identifying 
the presence of cystic changes in the uterine lining and dif-
ferentiating between pyometra and other uterine diseases. 
When large volumes of fluid/pus are present in uterus detec-
tion by ultrasound is easier ( Qureshi et al., 2002). A uterus 
filled with pus often shows sacs of echogenic material on 
ultrasound examination (Fig. 2).
Vaginal cytology usually reveals severe leukocyte de -
generation, neutrophils, and some macrophages, plasma -
cytes, and lymphocytes ( Vandeplassche, 1991 ). Uterine 
culture can be performed to identify the type of bacte -
ria causing the infection and guide appropriate antibi -
otic selection. Vaginoscopy has also been recommended 
for direct observation of the hemorrhagic or mucopuru -
lent discharge originating from the uterus ( Goldston and 
Hoskins, 1997 ).
FIG.  1 Radiograph of a bitch with pyometra showing sacculations of 
pus filled uterus.

Diseases of reproductive system of female dogs and cats  Chapter | 14  221
2.1.5 Therapy
Like in dogs, pyometra in cats is also considered an emer -
gency (White, 1998). The prognosis for pyometra is gen -
erally favorable with prompt diagnosis and appropriate 
treatment. However, the condition can be life-threatening 
if left untreated ( Hagman, 2022). The treatment of CEH-P 
complex depends on several factors, such as severity of the 
disease, the overall health of the patient, and the owner's 
breeding plans. The two main treatment options are medi -
cal management and surgical removal of uterus and ova -
ries (Jhonson, 1994; Harvey, 1998; Johnston et al., 2001b; 
Agudelo, 2005). Medical management includes the use of 
prostaglandins to induce luteolysis and subsequent uterine 
evacuation (Hagman, 2022). This method is most suitable 
for patients with early-stage disease, minimal uterine en -
largement, and pets not suitable for surgery. Correction 
of fluid deficits, proper administration of antibiotics, and 
other supportive therapy are required. Close monitoring and 
follow-up examinations are essential to ensure complete 
resolution of the infection. Ovariohysterectomy (spaying) 
is the treatment of choice in most complex cases of CEH-P 
(Hagman, 2022). It provides a definitive cure by removing 
the uterus and ovaries, eliminating the hormonal influence, 
and preventing future pyometra. Surgical treatment is par -
ticularly recommended for animals with recurrent pyome -
tra, severe disease, or if the owner has no breeding plans 
(Hagman, 2022).
2.1.6 Prevention strategies
Prevention of CEH-P complex relies on controlling the re -
productive cycle and avoiding exposure to progesterone for 
prolonged periods. Spaying at an appropriate age, prefer -
ably before the first heat cycle, significantly reduces the 
risk of developing CEH-P complex. Responsible breeding 
 practices, such as proper timing of mating and regular vet -
erinary care, are also essential to minimize the occurrence 
of this disorder (Johnston et al., 2001b).
2.2 Metritis
Metritis is an inflammation of the uterus that usually occurs 
after pregnancy due to a bacterial infection. Factors such as 
prolonged or difficult delivery, mummified or decomposed 
pup, and retained fetuses or placentas may cause metritis 
(Johnston et al., 2001b). Escherichia coli bacteria are a com-
mon cause of infection of the uterus ( Orfanou et al., 2008). 
The primary sign of infection is a pus-like discharge from 
the vulva. Female dogs with metritis are usually depressed 
or feverish, have a reduced appetite, and may neglect their 
offspring. Pups may become restless and cry incessantly. 
The presence of a malodorous, red-brown, purulent, or san-
guinopurulent vulvar discharge may be the other finding. 
Bitches with metritis may develop shock due to severe de -
hydration (i.e., hypovolemic shock), septicemia, or endotox-
emia (Kustritz and Barber, 2003). The infection is diagnosed 
through physical examination, X-rays, ultrasonography, and 
laboratory tests. Treatment includes administering fluids, sup-
portive care, and antibiotics. The vaginal cytology of bitches 
or queens with metritis reveals large numbers of degenerate 
neutrophils (Kustritz and Barber, 2003). Medications can also 
be given to expel a retained fetus or placenta. Administration 
of broad-spectrum antibiotic therapy and symptomatic treat-
ment are required. Ecbolic agents like oxytocin and PGF2α 
may be used. Dogs with metritis may be recommended 
for ovariohysterectomy if future breeding is not required 
(Johnston et al., 2001b; Kustritz and Barber, 2003).
2.3 Subinvolution of placental sites
Subinvolution of placental sites (SIPS) is a disorder that 
occurs after whelping as a result of abnormal repair of 
the lining of the uterus (where the placenta was attached) 
(Johnston et al., 2001c). After giving birth, the uterus slowly 
returns to its normal size in a process called involution. 
Normally, a bloody discharge accompanies this process for 
up to 16 weeks after birth. In some dogs, the discharge lasts 
much longer ( Orfanou et al., 2009 ). The condition is most 
common in dogs less than 3 years old after their first lit -
ter. In the bitches with SIPS, regression or degeneration of 
trophoblastic cells does not take place normally; instead, 
the cells continue to invade deep into the glandular layer 
or even into the myometrium which prevents normal in -
volution (Johnston et al., 2001c ). Diagnosis is exclusively 
based upon history and clinical signs. There are no signs 
except for discharge from the uterus, which contains blood. 
Blood loss is usually not severe with this condition. It re -
solves on its own and usually does not recur. Administration 
of a single dose of 25–50 mg medroxyprogesterone may 
FIG.  2 Ultrasound picture of a bitch with pyometra showing sacs  
of echogenic material.

222 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
be helpful (Sontas et al., 2011b ). Low oral doses of a pro -
gestogen (megestrol acetate, 0.1 mg/kg body weight [bw] 
once daily for the first week, then 0.05 mg/kg bw once daily 
for the second week) have also been suggested ( V oorhorst 
et  al., 2013). Spaying is curative, but it is not necessary 
unless the bleeding is severe ( Kustritz and Barber, 2003 ). 
Methylergometrine maleate, a semisynthetic ergot alkaloid, 
has been suggested to be administered orally as an adjuvant 
therapy, to control bleeding (Rasool and Kumar, 2021).
2.4 Uterine neoplasia
Neoplasia of the canine and feline uterus is a rare occur -
rence in veterinary medicine, accounting for 0.3%–0.4% of 
all tumors (Brodey, 1970; Miller et al., 2003). The low inci-
dence is attributed to the surgical removal of the uterus and 
ovaries in most dogs at early or late ages. The most common 
canine uterine tumors are leiomyomas, which are benign 
mesenchymal tumors most frequently observed in the vagi-
nal tract of dogs ( Herron, 1983). In cats, adenocarcinomas 
and leiomyomas have been identified ( Miller et al., 2003 ). 
Leiomyomas are characteristically noninvasive, slow-
growing tumors that can be difficult to distinguish from 
their malignant epithelial counterparts (leiomyosarcoma) 
without histological evaluation ( Herron, 1983 ). Clinical 
signs reported in dogs related to uterine tumors include ab-
normal estrus cycles, tenesmus, stranguria, and abdominal 
distension from large space-occupying lesions (Stein, 1981; 
Sontas et  al., 2010b ; Bottcher et  al., 2012). Most tumors 
are, however, diagnosed during an elective ovariohyster -
ectomy ( Miller et  al., 2003 ). Given their benign nature, 
lipoleiomyomas and leiomyomas offer a good long-term 
prognosis with successful surgical excision (Herron, 1983). 
Diagnostic imaging is an important step in determining the 
tissue of origin of abdominal masses and subsequent plan -
ning for treatment. However, the size and nature of large 
uterine masses can make the interpretation of abdominal ra-
diographs and ultrasonography challenging (Percival et al., 
2018). When diagnosed clinically, surgical removal of the 
tumor is the treatment of choice (Pervical et al., 2018).
3 Diseases of vagina
3.1 Vaginal fold prolapse
Vaginal fold prolapse (VFP) is the protrusion of edematous 
vaginal tissue into or through the vulvar opening ( Sontas 
et al., 2010a; Alan et al., 2007). Traditionally, this condition 
has been referred to as vaginal hyperplasia, vaginal hyper -
trophy, and vaginal prolapse. But it is not a true prolapse, 
because the protrusion only affects the vaginal mucosa and 
the extremely edematous vaginal tissue protrudes in thick 
folds; therefore, the condition is better referred to as vaginal 
fold prolapse (Purswell, 2000).
There is the involvement of the entire vaginal wall in 
the case of “true” prolapse ( Ortega-Pacheco et al., 2012 ). 
True vaginal prolapse (protrusion of normal vaginal tis -
sue through the vulvar lips) is a very rare condition in the 
bitches. Dystocia, tenesmus, constipation, or forced extrac-
tion of the male penis during the genital tie contribute to the 
occurrence of true prolapse (Purswell, 2000; Smith, 2003). 
Also reported due to increased intra-abdominal pressure 
secondary to ascites, and altered perineal and vulvar con -
formation after an injury (Johnston et al., 2001d).
3.1.1 Occurrence
VFP almost always occurs in intact bitches during proestrus 
and estrus. Following hyperplasia of the stratified squamous 
epithelium, intracellular edema and spongiosis of the vagi -
nal mucosa occur as a result of an exaggerated response of 
the vaginal mucosa to estrogens (Sontas et al., 2010a; Alan 
et al., 2007). VFP is a very rarely reported condition in cats 
(Johnston et al., 2001e; McKelvey et al., 2014).
3.1.2 Clinical manifestation
The most common clinical sign is a protrusion of a small 
bulge or pear-shaped or doughnut-shaped tumor-like vagi -
nal mass from the vulvar opening is in intact bitches during 
proestrus and estrus (Sontas et al., 2010a; Galal et al., 2018) 
(Figs. 3 and 4). Normal serosanguineous vulvar discharge of 
proestrus or estrus may be observed (Smith, 2003). Licking 
of the mass, difficulty in urination, and inability to copulate 
may be observed in some bitches ( Sontas et al., 2010a ). If 
the vaginal tissue remains exposed, excoriation of mucosa 
and trauma may be observed (Manothaiudom and Johnston, 
1991; Sontas et al., 2010a).
FIG. 3 Vaginal fold prolapse in a bitch.

Diseases of reproductive system of female dogs and cats  Chapter | 14  223
3.1.3 Diagnosis
Diagnosis can be made by clinical findings of the protruded 
vaginal mass from the vulvar opening. The clinical signs of 
proestrus and estrus (characteristic serosanguineous estrous 
discharge, and the presence of estrous behavior), and vagi -
nal cytology results (presence of cornified vaginal epithelial 
cells) can confirm the influence of estrogen.
3.1.4 Therapy
The approach of the treatment depends on the severity of 
the prolapsed mass, tissue viability, and desirability of 
future breeding ( Sontas et  al., 2010a ). In most cases, the 
prolapsed mass regresses spontaneously with the onset of 
diestrus. However, recurrence at the subsequent estrous cy-
cle is very common ( Johnston et al., 2001d). Occasionally, 
a vaginal prolapse persists throughout pregnancy. Usually, 
prolapsed mass does not cause dystocia; however, some as-
sistance may require.
The treatment includes either decreasing estrogen stim -
ulus in the animal, removing the prolapsed tissue, or both 
(Johnston et al., 2001d).
As a conservative treatment, affected dogs may be in -
duced to ovulate (decreasing estrogen stimulus) with an in-
jection of either GnRH (2.2  μg/kg, I/M]) or hCG (1000  IU, 
IM). Regression of the prolapse starts following ovula -
tion induction by about 1  week ( Johnston et  al., 2001d ). 
However, recurrence of vaginal prolapse is possible in sub-
sequent proestrus or estrus. Medroxyprogesterone acetate 
(50 mg subcutaneously) has also been reported for success-
ful resolution of vaginal prolapse within 15  days in some 
bitches but not recommended (Johnston et al., 2001d).
Manual reduction of the prolapsed mass and placement 
of purse-string sutures have also been reported as the suc -
cessful treatment for vaginal prolapse in dogs. But due to 
discomfort and perivulvar trauma by the purse-string su -
tures, the technique is not recommended ( Johnston et  al., 
2001d).
Circumferential excision of prolapsed tissue can be 
performed in dogs with large peduncular vaginal prolapse 
or severely inflamed or devitalized prolapsed vaginal tis -
sue. The everted vaginal tissue is cut off and the cut edges 
of the vaginal wall are opposed using chromic catgut in a 
simple interrupted suture pattern. Recurrence is possible in 
some bitches after the excision of prolapsed tissue, during 
the subsequent proestrus or estrus ( Johnston et al., 2001d ; 
Smith, 2003).
Ovariectomy or OHE is performed to permanently 
correct the condition as the gonadal source of estrogen is 
eliminated. The prolapsed mass regresses shortly after the 
removal of the ovaries (Johnston et al., 2001d; Smith, 2003).
3.2 Vaginal neoplasia
Vaginal neoplasia includes the tumors arising from the 
vestibule or vagina and accounts for 2.4%–3% of all ca -
nine tumors ( Smith, 2003; McEntee, 2002). The majority 
of these tumors are benign ( Smith, 2003; Ortega-Pacheco 
et al., 2012 ). Leiomyomas are the most commonly occur -
ring benign vaginal tumors in bitches together with fibro -
mas (Fig. 5) and fibroleiomyomas; other benign tumors like 
lipomas (Fig. 6), polyps, melanomas, myxomas, and myxo-
fibromas are much less frequent ( Ortega-Pacheco et  al., 
FIG. 4 Vaginal fold prolapse in a stray bitch.
FIG. 5 Fibroma in a bitch.

224 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
2012). Among malignant vaginal tumor, Leiomyosarcoma 
is the most common ( Smith, 2003) and others such as ad -
enocarcinoma, fibrosarcoma, squamous cell carcinoma, 
hemangiosarcoma, osteosarcoma, mast cell tumor are 
much less frequently occurring ( Withrow and Vail, 2007 ; 
Furneaux, 1979 ). In cats, vaginal tumors are uncommon 
and benign leiomyomas are the most commonly reported 
tumors (Ortega-Pacheco et al., 2012).
Transmissible venereal tumor (TVT) also known as 
canine transmissible venereal tumor, infectious sarcoma, 
venereal granuloma, transmissible lymphosarcoma, or 
Sticker tumor, is a benign reticuloendothelial tumor of the 
dog (Purohit, 2008). TVT is the most commonly occurring 
vaginal tumor in tropical developing countries; however, it 
is relatively uncommon in the United States and Canada 
(Ortega-Pacheco et al., 2012).
3.2.1 Occurrence
Bitch at any age can be affected with vaginal neoplasia; 
however, the risk increases with the advancement of age in 
intact dogs (Thacher and Bradley, 1983; Smith, 2003). TVT 
is more common in young, free-roaming, intact bitches 
(Smith, 2003 ). Pathogenesis of vaginal/vulvar neoplasia 
(other than TVT) is unknown and may be dependent on the 
ovarian hormones (Johnston et al., 2001d). TVT arises from 
an allogeneic cellular transplant. Transmission of TVT oc -
curs through transplantation of neoplastic cells onto vaginal 
mucosa by an affected dog during coitus, and onto nasal 
and oral mucosa by licking of affected genitalia of self or 
other dogs ( Johnston et  al., 2001d ). TVT is a unique ex -
ample of a naturally occurring tumor that transmits as an 
allograft by cell transplantation, and the tumor becomes 
autonomous (Purohit, 2008). Metastasis of TVT is uncom -
mon, only occurring in puppies and immuno-compromised 
dogs (Purohit, 2008).
3.2.2 Clinical manifestation
The clinical signs commonly associated with vaginal neo -
plasia may include perineal enlargement, the presence of a 
mass within the vulva or protruding from the vulva (Fig. 7), 
mucoid, mucopurulent, or sanguineous vulvar discharge, 
vulvar licking, anorexia, weight loss tenesmus, dysuria, 
polyuria, and polydipsia ( Smith, 2003 ; Johnston et  al., 
2001d).
3.2.3 Diagnosis
Diagnosis of the vaginal tumors is made by physical ex -
amination and confirmed by cytology or histopathology 
of the mass ( Smith, 2003 ; Ortega-Pacheco et  al., 2012 ). 
Vaginoscopic examination may be helpful to localize the 
growth of the tumor within the vaginal canal ( Johnston 
et  al., 2001d). Differentiation of the tumors from vaginal 
fold prolapse can be made by evaluating the stage of the 
estrous cycle and the relationship of vaginal mass with the 
onset of signs, location of the mass, and failure of the mass 
to regress postestrus. A vaginal mass present in a spayed 
bitch, or in an intact bitch unrelated to the estrous cycle, 
should be considered a vaginal tumor ( Smith, 2003). TVT 
may be vegetative and ulcerated (Smith, 2003), and can be 
diagnosed by its typical cauliflower-like or nodular appear-
ance and by the presence of typical round cells in impres -
sion smears (Purohit et al., 2004).
3.2.4 Treatment
As most of the vaginal neoplasms are benign in nature, 
complete surgical resection is usually curative and the treat-
ment of choice (Smith, 2003; Ortega-Pacheco et al., 2012). 
FIG. 6 Lipoma in a bitch.
FIG. 7 A German Shepherd bitch with TVT.

Diseases of reproductive system of female dogs and cats  Chapter | 14  225
Sometimes, an episiotomy may be required for complete 
visualization of the tumor mass ( Johnston et  al., 2001d ). 
OHE at the time of surgical resection of vaginal masses 
may be beneficial as it eliminates the hormonal influence 
and the possibility of recurrence of the tumor (Smith, 2003; 
Johnston et  al., 2001d ). TVT responds readily to chemo -
therapy. Administration of vincristine (0.025  mg/kg body 
weight) slowly intravenously at weekly intervals causes 
complete regression of the tumor; two to seven therapies 
may require (Smith, 2003).
4 Other diseases
4.1 Canine pseudopregnancy
Canine clinical pseudopregnancy (CPP) as the name sug -
gests is a clinical entity observed in nonpregnant bitch with 
clinical signs like those observed in pregnant bitch such as 
nesting, weight gain, mammary enlargement, and lactation 
(Gobello et  al., 2001a ). CPP has been classified as overt 
(with clinical signs) or covert and researchers consider that 
physiological pseudopregnancy (covert) occurs in every 
nonpregnant ovarian cycle in bitches (Gobello et al., 2001a). 
CPP is one of the most common clinical entities observed in 
clinical evaluations with the prevalence of 5%–32% (Nagar 
et al., 2008; Kumar et al., 2011).
4.1.1 Etiology
The exact etiology of CPP continues to be poorly known. 
The pituitary hormone prolactin plays a central role in the 
pathophysiology of overt CPP, but its exact role is not com-
pletely understood ( Grunau et  al., 1996 ). CPP appears to 
be related to and dependent on a previous prolonged, and 
in most cases a very recent, exposure to elevated levels of 
progesterone. Further, it has been suggested, based on indi-
rect evidence, that pseudopregnancy may occur because of 
increased concentrations of prolactin or an increased sen -
sitivity to prolactin induced by a more rapid than the nor -
mal decline of progesterone levels in the late luteal phase 
(Smith and McDonald, 1974 ; Graff et  al., 1977 ). In fact, 
spaying or ovariectomy during the luteal phase (i.e., dur -
ing metestrus/diestrus) induces pseudopregnancy in some 
bitches ( Gobello et  al., 2001b ). The potential causes of 
overt pseudopregnancy were previously reviewed (Gobello 
et al., 2001a).
4.1.2 Clinical findings
Bitches with CPP evidence signs of whelping including 
mammary enlargement, nesting, vomiting, and mother -
ing behavior ( Kumar et  al., 2011 ; Gobello et  al., 2001a ). 
In a large survey in UK behavioral changes, collecting and 
mothering objects was the most frequently reported behav-
ioral sign (96%), and 97% had some aggression (Root et al., 
2018). The most reported physical sign in this study was 
enlarged mammary glands and/or milk production (89%). 
Thus, dogs are referred to when one or more of these signs 
are observed. Ultrasound examination in dogs with pseu -
dopregnancy is used to rule out pregnancy ( Kumar et al., 
2011). No specific finding is observed on the ultrasound 
scan of CPP bitches. A small proportion of bitches (0.9%) 
with CPP evidence focal widening of uterine horn with 
ovoid masses termed pseudo-placentational endometrial 
hyperplasia (Marino et al., 2021).
4.1.3 Therapy
The therapy depends upon the severity of behavioral signs, 
owners’ preference, concurrent disease, and cost ( Marino 
et al., 2021). Not all bitches require therapy and mild cases 
may resolve spontaneously ( Gobello et  al., 2001a ). The 
permanent solution to the condition is spaying and af -
fected bitches should be spayed during anestrus ( Gobello 
et al., 2001b; Lee et al., 2006 ). Medical therapy includes 
the use of sex steroids (estrogens, androgens, and proges -
tins) and dopamine agonists (bromocriptine, cabergoline, 
and metergoline). The use of sex steroids for therapy of 
CPP has become less common ( Marino et al., 2021 ) and 
48% of the bitches with CPP were treated with bromocrip -
tine at the dose rate of 10–100  μg/kg/day or cabergoline 
5 μg/kg/day for 5–10  days has been suggested for the re -
mission of behavioral signs of CPP ( Gobello et al., 2001a ; 
Nagar et al., 2008 ). Bromocriptine may evoke some vom -
iting and thus should be administered in divided doses and 
prior administration of promethazine is suggested ( Grunau 
et al., 1996).

226 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Diseases of reproductive system of female dogs and cats  Chapter | 14  227

228 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

229

Chapter 15
Diseases of endocrine system in  
dogs and cats
1 Introduction
The endocrine system comprises a network of ductless 
glands, and the hormones produced by the endocrine glands 
directly enter into the bloodstream (or) lymph (or) tissue 
fluids. The hypothalamus is the central gland that produces 
releasing hormones which controls the whole endocrine 
system and is placed at the base of the brain and link the 
endocrine system with the nervous system. The master 
gland or pituitary gland (or hypophysis) responds to the 
stimuli produced by the hypothalamus (releasing hormone) 
and produces stimulating hormones and are send to indi -
vidual organs. Endocrine organs include the thyroid gland, 
parathyroid gland, adrenal glands (medulla and cortex), 
pituitary gland (anterior and posterior), pancreas (islets of 
Langerhans), ovaries, and testes (Figs. 1 and 2).
Canines and felines, particularly dogs and cats, had kin 
endocrine abnormalities similar to humans. These compan-
ion animals shared the same living area with human beings 
and live with us until their demise, granting the opportu -
nity for precise observation studies of the disease process. 
Further long-term studies on companion animals made the 
availability of their genomes for additional inventive re -
search. Additionally, canine genomes had a higher degree of 
analogy with human counterparts than laboratory animals 
such as mice and rats ( Dackowski et al., 2002 ; Tan et al., 
2002). To a great extent, companion animals also serve as 
a animal models for human endocrine illness. On that ac -
count, this chapter encloses several endocrine disorders of 
companion animals.
2 Hypothyroidism
2.1 Anatomy and pathophysiology
Dogs and cats have a pair of thyroid glands, a pair of elon -
gated lobes, located in front of the neck, caudal to the lar -
ynx, on either side of the trachea, about the level of the fifth 
to eighth tracheal cartilage, and the size of the gland dif -
fers by breed and body weight of the animals. The thyroid 
hormone is very much essential for normal growth, main -
tenance, and metabolism. Iodine is the chief element that 
plays a vital role in thyroid hormone production and gland 
health. Hypothyroidism and hyperthyroidism were con -
sidered to be the most important endocrinopathies in dogs 
and cats due to either less or higher secretion of thyroid 
hormones (Thyroxine; T4), respectively. Hypothyroidism 
leads to a sluggish metabolism, and the associated signs are 
dermatological and associated organ dysfunctions. Primary 
hypothyroidism results from lymphocytic thyroiditis, an au-
toimmune disease, and is common in adults, characterized 
by primary irreversible destruction of the thyroid gland or 
idiopathic thyroid degeneration. Secondary hypothyroid -
ism is associated with abnormal functioning (or) anatomi -
cal changes in the hypothalamus-pituitary axis leading to 
insufficient production of thyroid-stimulating hormone 
(TSH) from the pituitary gland. Tertiary hypothyroidism is 
rare and is attributable to deficient secretion of thyrotropin-
releasing hormone (TRH) from the hypothalamus (Fig. 3).
2.2 Clinical signs
Clinical signs like lethargy, obesity, puffy skin 
(Myxoedema), tragic facial expression, exercise intoler -
ance, mental dullness, hypothermia or cold intolerance, 
reduced drug metabolism, bradycardia, hypotension, and 
dermatological abnormalities include brittle hair coat, bi -
lateral symmetrical nonpruritic alopecia, dorsal scaling, hy-
perpigmentation, seborrheic dermatitis, rat tail appearance, 
discoloration of coat, circular alopecia, dry and thickened 
skin; either of the combinations would facilitate the suspect 
of hypothyroidism. Other signs, neurological changes like 
ataxia, hypermetria, head tilt, cranial nerve changes, ocular 
changes like corneal lipid deposition, and reproductive dis-
orders are also reported (Fig. 4).

230 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
FIG. 1 Endocrine system of dogs (L. Lokesh and B. Anil Kumar).
FIG. 2 The endocrine system of cats (L. Lokesh and B. Anil Kumar).
FIG. 3 Hypothalamo-pituitary and thyroid axis.

Diseases of endocrine system in dogs and cats   Chapter | 15  231
2.3 Diagnosis
Hypothyroidism is said to be over diagnosed endocrinop -
athy in canines due to long duration of preclinical phase 
and high test specificity. Confirmation of hypothyroidism 
is strenuous by virtue of diverse clinical signs and the un -
availability of a single appropriate laboratory test. However, 
lower-circulating thyroid hormone (T4) levels with high-
circulating TSH confirm hypothyroidism in most of the 
clinical cases. Nevertheless, normal TSH concentration is 
detected in more or less 13%–38% of hypothyroid dogs 
(Ramsey et  al., 1997 ). Hence, hypothyroidism should be 
excluded if dogs have normal TSH concentration. Besides 
that, the high reference range of both hormones in the canine 
population exasperates and makes it tough to confirm the 
same in dogs. Assessment of total T4 concentrationwould 
help in screening hypothyroidism due to its high test sen -
sitivity (89%–100%) ( Dixon and Mooney, 1999 ). If the 
dog has a low T4 concentration, further assessment of free 
T4 (fT4) and thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH) is sug -
gested. The combination of T4, fT4, and TSH assessment 
effectively rules out hypothyroidism. On top of normal 
daily fluctuations, several medications (Trimethoprim-
Sulfamethoxazole, Phenobarbitone, Glucocorticoids, 
Ketoprofen, and Carprofen) and nonthyroidal illnesses 
(Euthyroid sick syndrome) pave the way to lower serum T4 
concentrations and also affect fT4 and TSH concentrations 
(Hall et al., 1993). Yet fT4 concentrations are less likely to 
be affected by concurrent illnesses (Kantrowitz et al., 2001; 
Torres et al., 2003). For that reason, thyroid testing will not 
be preferred to perform on systemically ill dogs. However, 
in certain unavoidable circumstances, if at all test is done 
on a dog with concurrent illness, the results should be inter-
preted cautiously. Wide variations of T3 concentration make 
it an impractical tool for the diagnosis of hypothyroidism.
FIG. 4 Clinical presentation of dogs affected with hypothyroidism. (A) Tragic face. (B) Rat tail appearance. (C) Hyperpigmentation. (D) Bilateral 
patchy alopecia.

232 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
2.4 Treatment
Levothyroxine is the standard of care for hypothyroidism 
owing to its low cost and high efficacy. According to the 
clinician, the preferred dose (0.02  mg/kg) should be given 
on an empty stomach, early morning, given once daily 
orally (or) initially twice daily (morning and evening) and 
followed by once daily. Lethargy generally builds on a few 
weeks of therapy and after 4–6  weeks of therapy. A recog-
nizable improvement would be noticed in most of the signs, 
while dermatological issues take months to resolve. Postpill 
reassessment has to be done 4 weeks after therapy, and the 
dose should be adjusted according to the test results. If the 
postpill concentration is lower than the reference range, the 
dose can be increased to 25% (or) the postpill concentration 
is higher than the reference range, the dose can be reduced 
to 25% and rechecked after 4  weeks. Reassessment should 
be done initially once every 4 weeks, and once the effective 
establishment of the dose is done, reassessment can be done 
once every 6 months. Importantly, levothyroxine should be 
administered cautiously in cardiac patients as it may cause 
cardiac abnormalities.
3 Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism also referred to as thyrotoxicosis, results in 
a multisystemic disorder due to the high production of thy-
roxine (T4) and triiodothyronine, which is frequently encoun-
tered in aged cats of more than 9 years of age (Caney, 2014).
3.1 Clinical signs
Systemic signs noticed in thyrotoxicosis are weight loss, 
polydipsia, polyuria, and polyphagia along with hyperactiv-
ity, vomiting, diarrhea, along with the accompanied derma-
tological issues like matted and greasy hair coat.
3.2 Diagnosis
Physically palpable enlargement of the thyroid gland, along 
with the elevated T4 level, confirms hyperthyroidism in 
cats. However, a small percentage of cats may have normal 
T4 levels in thyrotoxicosis. Thyroid scintigraphy confirms 
thyrotoxicosis in suspected cats. This condition also leads 
to cardiac and renal problems; hence, serum biochemical 
profile and echocardiography should be advised to rule out 
such concurrent illness.
3.3 Treatment
Therapy of hyperthyroidism could be targeted in four forms, 
as per the owner’s convenience and the health status of the 
cat. It could be practiced by oral medication (or) radioac -
tive iodine therapy (or) surgical intervention (or) dietary 
protocol.
Oral therapy involves antithyroid medications, which are 
readily available and less expensive. Some animals experi -
ence vomiting, anorexia, anemia, and fever with weakness.
Radioactive iodine therapy is less commonly available 
and is expensive. This therapy will be curative to the cats. 
However, these radioactive substances should be used only 
by licensed vets with the "as low as reasonably achievable" 
(ALARA) principle to avoid environmental contamination. 
Rarely improper (or) higher doses may lead to hypothyroid-
ism, necessitating thyroid hormone supplementation.
Surgical thyroidectomy would give a long-term and per-
manent cure in many cats. However, it is invasive and needs 
blood, cardiac and kidney evaluation before proceeding to 
surgical protocol, and there may be a chance for permanent 
damage to the parathyroid gland.
The dietary protocol involves the dietary restriction of 
iodine. Such long-term reduction in iodine may lead to an 
overall reduction in health status.
4 Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is one of the following common re-
ported endocrine disorders in canines, with an overall preva-
lence of 0.3% to 1.3% (Guptill et al., 2003). This disorder is 
consistently reported in bitches and middle to older-aged pets.
4.1 Factors and pathophysiology
Disruption of carbohydrates, protein, fat, and metabolism 
will induce an absolute (or) relative insulin deficiency. 
Insulin, the pancreatic endocrine hormone, helps in the di -
etary conversion of glucose (the primary body's main en -
ergy source) from proteins in the blood and activates the 
liver cells and muscles to take up glucose from the blood, 
leading to hyperglycemia (Fig. 5).
Insulin-dependent DM (comparable with type 1 DM 
in humans) is associated with immune-mediated affection 
of beta cells of the pancreas responsible for insulin secre -
tion. Autoimmune mechanisms (in >50% of diabetic dogs), 
rarely pancreatic vacuolar degeneration and pancreatitis also 
account for the occurrence of DM ( Davison et al., 2008 ). 
Hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism, other hormonal 
(or) iatrogenic insulin-resistance triggers were concur -
rently reported along with DM ( Hess et al., 2000). Insulin-
resistant (or) type 2 DM (similar to type 2 DM in humans) is 
most commonly reported in cats (O’Brien, 2002). Impaired 
insulin secretion and insulin resistance may have a genetic 
predisposition. Factors like a low (or) absence of physical 
activity and concurrent obesity may also precipitate the dis-
ease occurrence (Slingerland et al., 2009). Growth hormone 
excess due to a functional somatotrophic pituitary adenoma 
is also reported as the cause of diabetes mellitus in cats. 
Disorders such as progesterone-induced GH excess (or) hy-
percortisolism often precipitate DM (Fig. 6).

Diseases of endocrine system in dogs and cats   Chapter | 15  233
4.2 Clinical signs
Loss of weight with polyphagia, polyuria and polydipsia 
are the principle signs, and vomiting, along with poor coat 
quality, is also reported in most of the clinical cases.
4.3 Diagnosis
Pathognomonic clinical signs and fasting blood glucose 
estimation confirm the disease. The normal reported ref -
erence range of blood glucose levels is 80–120  mg/dL 
(4.4–6.6 mmoL/L). The high caloric meal may raise the 
value up to 250–300 mg/dL (13.6–16.5 mmoL/L). However, 
in typica a l DM case, the value will be above 400  mg/dL 
(22 mmoL/L) of blood glucose, with a range of 400–600 mg/
dL (22–33  mmoL/L) and above should be considered as 
DM. Usually kidney conserves glucose, but once blood 
sugar reaches 180 mg/dL or above (above the renal threshold 
limit), kidney removes excess glucose through urine, termed 
glucosuria (Kumar et al., 2014 ). High levels of stress also 
induce glucosuria and can be differentiated from DM by the 
assessment of serum fructosamine (a compound formed by 
FIG. 5 Pathophysiology of type 1 diabetes mellitus.
FIG. 6 Pathophysiology of type 2 diabetes mellitus.

234 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
a nonenzymatic covalent bond between a sugar (fructose 
or glucose) and a protein (largely albumin)) level. Stress 
induces sudden changes in blood glucose levels, but fruc -
tosamine gives collective of report of 2–3 weeks helping in 
identifying the cause ( Elliott et al., 1999 ). Elevated serum 
fructosamine concentration confirms diabetes mellitus.
4.4 Treatment
4.4.1 Dietary management
Dietary supplementation with high complex carbohydrates 
(>50% DM) and high fiber (>10% DM) are indicated to min-
imize the postprandial fluctuations in blood glucose and ad-
ditionally help to potentiate insulin action. High-soluble fiber 
(fruits, legumes, and oats) in the diet promotes insulin action 
by delaying gastric emptying and high intestinal transit time.
4.4.2 Insulin therapy in dogs
Humulin N (NPH) and Lente insulins (Caninsulin/
Vetsulin) are most commonly used at the starting dose of 
0.25–0.5 IU/kg twice a day in dogs. Lente insulin (mix -
ture of ultra-Lente and semi-Lente insulin) has to be given 
once daily as it has a longer duration of action compared 
to NPH. Nearly 30% of dogs have adequate glycemic con -
trol with once-a-day lente insulin therapy. Human recom -
binant insulin and pure pork insulin should be avoided in 
animals due to the development of anti-insulin antibodies. 
Long-acting insulins such as protamine zinc insulin (PZI), 
Glargine and Detemir are not recommended for the initial 
therapy and management.
4.4.3 Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy
Transsphenoidal hypophysectomy practice will not only 
cause remission of acromegaly but also quite often leads to 
the resolution of diabetes mellitus in cats (Meij et al., 2004).
5 Hyperadrenocorticism (HAC)  
(or) Cushing’s syndrome
5.1 Factors and pathophysiology
Hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) or Cushing’s syndrome is 
resulted due to chronic over production of cortisol and is 
commonly reported in older dogs above 8 years of age, and 
females are predisposed. Poodles, Dachshunds, Terriers, 
and Beagles are reported to be at high risk but rarely re -
ported in cats. Based on the primary cause, there are three 
forms of Cushing’s syndrome in dogs that are pituitary de -
pendent hyperadrenocorticism (PDH), adrenal-dependent 
hyperadrenocorticism (ADH), and iatrogenic HAC. PDA 
(functional corticotrophin adenoma) is most commonly 
(80%–85%) reported both in dogs and cats wherein, a pitu-
itary tumor may arise from the anterior lobe or the pars in -
termedia of the pituitary gland. In the remaining 15%–20%, 
it results due to ADH (functional adrenocortical adenoma or 
carcinoma), and rarely ectopic adrenocorticotropin secre -
tion or food-dependent hypercortisolism is reported in dogs 
(Galac et al., 2005, 2008 ). HAC is a significant, complex 
and dangerous disease with a wide array of clinical signs 
with further complications with other disorders like diabe -
tes mellitus usually (Fig. 7).
FIG. 7 Pathophysiology of hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) (or) Cushing’s syndrome.

Diseases of endocrine system in dogs and cats   Chapter | 15  235
5.2 Clinical signs
Excess steroid secretion in the body causes muscle weak -
ness, delayed wound healing, generalized neuropathies 
and coagulation abnormalities. Pathognomonic signs of 
Cushing’s disease includes pot-bellied abdomen, weight 
gain, muscle weakness, along with systemic signs like 
polyuria, polydipsia, polyphagia, hepatomegaly, dyspnea, 
exercise intolerance, reproductive disorders, classical der -
matological signs such as symmetrical nonpruritic bilateral 
truncal alopecia, hyperpigmentation, hypotonic thin skin, 
numerous comedones, prominent ventral abdominal vascu-
lature and scaling (Fig. 8).
5.3 Diagnosis
5.3.1 Serum biochemistry
Marked elevation in serum alkaline phosphatase (ALP), ala-
nine aminotransferase (AST), moderate hyperglycemia, hy-
percholesterolemia, hypertriglyceridemia, low blood urea 
and may also be combined with hypothyroxinemia.
5.3.2 Adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) 
stimulation test
A most commonly used screening test and can help spon -
taneous differentiation of iatrogenic hyperadrenocorticism 
with high sensitivity in PDH (85%) and moderate sensitiv -
ity in ADH (65%). However, these results can be influenced 
by stress.
5.3.3 Low-dose dexamethasone suppression 
test
More sensitive and reliable test than the ACTH stimulation 
test; however, affected by stress and cannot detect iatro -
genic Cushing’s disease.
5.3.4 Urinary cortisol: Creatinine ratio
The urinary cortisol-to-creatinine ratio of above 300 is con-
sidered positive, and below 5 is negative. However, this test 
has a very low specificity. Other tests should be done in 
order to differentiate PDH and ADH, even after UC:CR 
test. These include the high-dose dexamethasone suppres -
sion test (HDDST), ultrasound of adrenal glands and en -
dogenous ACTH measurement.
5.4 Treatment
Hypophysectomy is preferred in dogs with pituitary tumors. 
The drug Trilostane (3–5  mg/kg) can be administered as a 
palliative therapy. In ADH cases, mitotane is the recom -
mended drug. Alternatively, radiotherapy and adrenalec -
tomy may also be done for quick recovery.
6 Hypoadrenocorticism (or) Addison’s 
disease
Hypoadrenocorticism is a primary disease of dogs resulting 
due to complete damage to adrenal glands causing insufficient 
production of corticosteroids, aldosterone, and cortisol. These 
steroid hormones are vital for the maintenance of blood vol-
ume, pressure, and to alleviate stress. Most of the cases are un-
derdiagnosed or misdiagnosed, as the physiological effect of 
this disorder is vague and also confused with other disorders.
6.1 Clinical signs
Addison’s disease is characterized by gastrointestinal dis -
orders (polydipsia), polyuria, hypovolemia, hypotension, 
poor stress tolerance, shivering with or without tremors and 
muscle stiffness.
6.2 Therapy
This disorder can be clinically managed with desoxycor -
ticosterone pivalate (DOCP), a prolonged-release suspen -
sion and is given subcutaneously once monthly. This drug 
controls serum electrolytes more effectively than other drug 
formulations, such as fludrocortisone ( Baumstark et  al., 
2014). Apart from this, dogs may also require daily oral 
medication with prednisolone.
Rarely, there may be sudden onset of clinical signs 
resulting in hormonal imbalances causing hypovolemic 
shock, collapse and renal failure, which is referred to as an 
Addisonian crisis.
7 Primary hypoparathyroidism
Primary hypoparathyroidism refers to the complete absence 
or deficiency of parathyroid hormone (PTH), resulting in 
hypocalcemia and hyperphosphatemia. This condition may 
FIG. 8 Bilateral alopecia and bruising of the skin in hyperadrenocorti -
cism (HAC) (or) Cushing’s syndrome.

236 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
happen due to accidental damage or removal of the parathy-
roid gland (iatrogenic) during thyroidectomy or trauma to 
the neck. Clinical signs are similar to hypocalcemia, such 
as tetany, muscle spasm and tonic-clonic seizures. It can be 
managed with intra venous calcium therapy followed by 
intramuscular and oral supplementation with calcium as di-
rected by a physician. However, long-term calcium therapy 
is indicated in this condition.
8 Primary hyperparathyroidism
Constant secretion of PTH will lead to primary hyper -
parathyroidism and resulting in hypercalcemia and hypo -
phosphatemia. This condition may also happen due to a 
functional parathyroid tumor. This is characterized by poly-
dipsia and polyuria along with weight loss, muscle wasting, 
muscle tremor, lethargy, and exercise intolerance.
9 Secondary hyperparathyroidism
Chronic kidney disease, calcium or vitamin D deficiency 
is related to secondary hyperparathyroidism. Many times, 
it is a complication of chronic kidney disease. Sometimes, 
high phosphorus intake leads to relative or total calcium de-
ficiency (secondary hypocalcemia) owing to high calcium 
binding in the gut and reduced absorption. Lifelong calcium 
supplementation with complete blood workouts at regular 
intervals along with dietary changes, can be used to manage 
this syndrome.
10 Hyperaldosteronism in cats
Hyperaldosteronism in cats is the most commonly reported 
adrenal cortical disorder. It occurs as a consequence of adre-
nocortical neoplasia or idiopathic adrenocortical hyperpla -
sia (Javadi et al., 2005). This causes rise in systemic arterial 
pressure due to profuse aldosterone secretion and further 
results in potassium depletion (hypokalemia). Classical 
signs are paroxysmal flaccid paresis, acute blindness due to 
retinal detachment, intraocular hemorrhage and target organ 
(kidney, heart or brain) damage. Elevated plasma aldoste -
rone: renin ratio confirms the disorder in cats. The fludro -
cortisone acetate suppression test is the indicated diagnostic 
test (Djajadiningrat-Laanen et al., 2008).
11 Sex-hormone dermatoses
Sex-hormone dermatoses occur due to gonadal or adrenal 
dysfunctions. Generally, in these conditions, systemic signs 
are not reported; however, ill-defined dermatological signs 
such as alopecia and lesions at caudal ventrum and genita -
lia, spread to the limbs, flanks and neck. Some cases may 
exhibit seborrheic skin lesions and ceruminous otitis ex -
terna. Identification of neoplasia (Sertolicell tumor/Leydig 
cell tumor/Seminoma) or abnormal sex hormone levels in 
blood help to diagnose this disorder. Adrenal-related sex-
hormone dermatoses can be diagnosed by pre- and post-
ACTH assessment.
12 Hyperestrogenism
Hyperestrogenism is commonly reported in intact fe -
male dogs owing to the conditions like polycystic ovar -
ian disease, ovarian neoplasia, and iatrogenic causes. 
Gynecomastia, vulvar hypertrophy, abnormal estrus cycle 
together with anemia, ecchymoses, petechiae, epistaxis, 
melena, or hematuria (due to bone marrow suppression) 
are frequently reported signs in this case. Commonly der -
matological manifestations encountered in these conditions 
are alopecia of the abdomen, neck and caudal aspects of 
the thighs, perineum, seborrhea, otitis externa, and second-
ary bacterial pyoderma and Malassezia pachy dermatitis. 
Diagnosis is made by eliminating other causes of dermatitis 
and by ultrasonography to delineate ovarian abnormalities. 
Ovariohysterectomy is the only permanent solution to re -
solve this condition (Fig. 9).
13 Hyperandrogenism
Testicular neoplasia or functional abnormalities in older 
male dogs would cause hyperandrogenism and are also re -
ported rarely in spayed females with pituitary dependent 
hyperadrenocorticism (PDH). The dermatological signs 
FIG. 9 Sex-hormone dermatoses characterized by hyperpigmentation of 
the ventral abdomen.

Diseases of endocrine system in dogs and cats   Chapter | 15  237
noticed are hyperplasia of tail gland and perianal gland, 
patchy hyperpigmentation in the anogenital area and seb -
orrheic dermatitis. Diagnosis is made by history, physical 
examination and assessment of blood testosterone levels. 
Positive response will be appreciated after castration and is 
considered as a therapeutic diagnosis. Ultrasonography is 
indicated for detecting nonpalpable testicular tumors.
14 Immune-mediated endocrine 
deficiency syndromes
Immune-mediated (or) autoimmune endocrine hormone 
deficiency syndrome (or) autoimmune polyglandular syn -
dromes are reported commonly in humans. It can be of two 
types, one is a type I autoimmune polyglandular syndrome 
which includes conditions like hypoparathyroidism, hy -
poadrenocorticism, cutaneous candidiasis and other, and 
type II autoimmune polyglandular syndrome comprising 
hypoadrenocorticism, primary hypothyroidism, insulin-
dependent diabetes mellitus, hyperthyroidism, myasthenia 
gravis, hypogonadism, celiac disease. In dogs, only type II 
autoimmune polyglandular syndrome is reported, incorpo -
rating hypoadrenocorticism and hypothyroidism. Primary 
hypothyroidism is commonly reported in dogs; however, 
hypoadrenocorticism and hypoparathyroidism are not un -
common in dogs but infrequent in cats. These conditions are 
considered to be the end stage of progressive autoimmune 
destruction and are associated with a high incidence of cir -
culating antibodies treatment.

239

Chapter 16
Diseases of the nervous system  
of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
The nervous system is known as the “master system” because 
it regulates the operation of all other systems and organs. 
Except for blood vessels and some neurological elements, 
the nervous system is derived from ectoderm. Anatomically 
the nervous system is divided into two parts: central and pe-
ripheral. The central nervous system consists of the brain and 
spinal cord, which are located within the cranial cavity and 
spinal canal, respectively (vertebral canal). Higher functions 
such as intelligence, memory, emotions, and learning are 
housed in the central nervous system (Tables 1 and 2).
Cranial nerves, spinal nerves, and ganglia associated 
with cranial and spinal nerves comprise the peripheral ner -
vous system. There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves, and the 
number of spinal nerves varies by species.
The nervous system is functionally divided into afferent 
and efferent nervous systems. The afferent nervous system 
brings sensory information to the CNS, whereas the effer -
ent nervous system carries motor commands to muscles and 
glands. It contains both visceral and somatic components. The 
somatic nervous system provides voluntary control over skel-
etal muscle contraction. The visceral component, also known 
as the autonomic nervous system, provides involuntary in -
nervations to structures such as the heart, glands, and smooth 
muscle. This is also known as the “Self-controlling Nervous 
System.” The sympathetic nervous system and the parasym-
pathetic nervous system are subsets of the autonomic nervous 
system. Because sympathetic preganglionic neurons originate 
in the thoracolumbar region (T1 to L2 spinal segment), it is 
referred to as thoracolumbar outflow. Preganglionic neurons 
of the parasympathetic nervous system originate in the cranio-
facial region (general visceral nuclei + S2, S3, S4).
2 Cells of the nervous system
The cells of the nervous system are broadly classified into 
two categories: nerve cells or neurons, and supporting cells 
or neuroglial cells.
2.1 Neurons
The structural and operational components of the nervous 
system are called neurons. These cells are found in the white 
matter of the brain but are found in the gray matter of the 
spinal cord. These neurons are made up of an axon, a cell 
body, and dendrites. The nucleus is a group of nerve cell 
bodies found in the central nervous system. It is referred to 
as ganglia if it is located outside the central nervous system.
Neurons are classified anatomically into unipolar, bipo-
lar, and multipolar neurons based on the number of nerve 
processing ends extending from the cell body. Neurons are 
classified as Golgi type-I or type-II based on the length of 
their axon and dendrite. Golgi type-I neurons have a long 
axon and a short dendrite (for example, pyramidal cells of 
the cerebral cortex and Purkinje cells of the cerebellum), 
whereas Golgi type-II neurons have axon length equal to 
dendrite length (for example stellate cells of the cerebrum, 
cerebellum). Neurons are divided into two types based on 
their function: sensory neurons and motor neurons. Sensory 
neurons send impulses from the periphery to the CNS, while 
motor neurons send impulses from the CNS to muscles and 
glands. Upper motor neurons and lower motor neurons 
are the two types of motor neurons in the somatic nervous 
system. Upper motor neurons control voluntary muscular 
activity and have cell bodies in the brain, whereas lower 
motor neurons have cell bodies in the brain stem and spinal 
cord. Similarly, neurons in the autonomic nervous system 
are classified as postganglionic neurons or preganglionic 
neurons.
2.2 Neuroglial cells or supporting cells
The CNS contains four types of supporting cells: astrocytes, 
ependymal cells, oligodendrocytes, and microglial cells. 
Astrocytes are the largest and most numerous supporting 
cells. They play an important role in the nervous system 
as support cells. The blood-brain barrier is formed by as -
trocytes. Ependymal cells are mostly found in the choroid

240 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
plexus and the spinal canal’s ventricle. Cerebrospinal fluid 
is secreted by them. In the CNS, oligodendrocytes form 
myelin sheaths around axons. In the peripheral nervous 
system, it is carried by Schwann cells. Microglia cells are 
white blood cells, generally not found in the CNS. Their 
main function is to provide protection.
3 Cranial nerves
Cranial nerves are nerves that emerge from the brain di -
rectly. There are 12 pairs of cranial nerves that carry out 
various functions such as vision, hearing, sensation, and so 
on. Table 2 lists the functions and common signs of dys -
function of 12 pairs of cranial nerves:
4 Diagnosis of neurological problems  
in dogs and cats
Diagnosis of neurological disease needs multiple diagnos -
tic procedures or protocols to arrive at a definitive diag -
nosis. These may include blood analysis, imaging of the 
brain, cerebrospinal fluid analysis, and neurophysiology 
studies. The accuracy of diagnosis depends on the tests em-
ployed. A single test is not sufficient to arrive at a definitive 
diagnosis.
 1. History and signalment
 2. Physical examination
 3. Neurological examination
 4. Test on blood and serum
TABLE 1 Number of spinal nerves in different species of animals.
Species of animal Number of spinal nerves Species of animal Number of spinal nerves
Dog 35 pairs Sheep and goat 37 pairs
Cat 38 pairs Horse 42 pairs
Cattle 37 pairs Camel 36 pairs
TABLE 2 Cranial nerves, their functions, and the signs of dysfunction.
No. Nerves Function Signs of dysfunction
I Olfactory nerve Olfaction (smell) Anosmia, hyposmia
II Optic nerve Vision Blindness
III Oculomotor nerve Motor innervations to extrinsic ocular muscle and sensory 
innervations to Iris
Ptosis, strabismus, mydriasis, fixed 
pupil
IV Trochlear nerve Motor innervations dorsal oblique muscle Strabismus
V Trigeminal nerve Sensory innervations to skin of face and motor 
innervations muscle of mastication
Facial anesthesia, dropped jaw, 
atrophy of muscle
VI Abducens nerve Lateral rectus and retractor bulbi muscle Inability to retract globe
VII Facial nerve Motor innervations to muscles of facial expression 
and sensory innervations rostral two-third of tongue, 
lachrymal, and salivary gland
Drooping of lips and jaw, 
hypoesthesia of tongue, and 
reduced secretion
VIII Vestibulocochlear nerve Sensory innervations to hearing, and body balance Deafness
IX Glossopharyngeal nerve Sensory innervations and motor innervations—pharynx Dysphagia
X Vagus nerve Sensory innervations to larynx, pharynx, abdomen, and 
thoracic region
Motor innervations to movement of muscles in neck 
responsible for speech and swallowing
Dysphagia, salivary disorder, 
regurgitation, cardiac, and GI signs
XI Accessory nerve Motor innervations to trapezius muscle Atrophy of neck muscle
XII Hypoglossal nerve Motor innervations to tongue Paralysis and atrophy of the tongue

Diseases of the nervous system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 16  241
 5. CSF analysis
 6. Electro encephalography—EEG
 7. Electromyography—EMG
 8. Electromyography—EMG
 9. Spinal cord evoked response
 10. Routine radiography
 11. Myelography
 12. Computed tomography—CT
 13. MRI—magnetic resonance imaging
 14. Surgical biopsy
4.1 History and signalment
While taking a history, a series of questions should be asked 
to determine the most likely cause of the primary complaint. 
It must include information such as present complaint, pre-
vious illness, vaccination status, possible trauma, exposure 
to toxins, familial problems, current medication, and animal 
details such as age, breed, and gender, all of which aid in 
making a definitive diagnosis (LeCouteur, 2009a; Platt and 
Olby, 2015).
It is critical to determine the onset and progression of 
neurological disorders when diagnosing them. Neurological 
disorders are classified into the following categories based 
on their onset and progression:
A. Neonatal nonprogressive: This is a condition in which 
young animals do not develop gradually, but rather ap -
pear shortly after birth and remain unchanged through -
out their lives.
B. Acute progressive: This is a condition that develops af-
ter an acute insult and worsens rapidly or within 72 h of 
the event.
C. Acute nonprogressive: This is a condition that appears 
immediately or within 72  h of an event and remains 
unchanged.
D. Chronic progressive: This is a condition that develops 
gradually and has signs that worsen over a period of 
days, weeks, or months.
E. Episodic: The animal exhibits signs for a short period of 
time before returning to normalcy.
The most crucial diagnostic procedures for determin -
ing neurological illnesses are history and clinical signs. 
Before making a final diagnosis, it is important to be able 
to determine whether the condition is neurological or not. 
If it is neurological, should identify whether is it connected 
to the brain, spinal cord, or neuromuscular system? The 
clinical problem differential list should be created after lo -
calization. A memory aid like VITAMIN D or DAMN IT 
V system ( Table  3) can be used to finish the differential 
list without missing any medical conditions ( LeCouteur, 
2009a; Stassen, 2011). Signalment, onset, progression, and 
symmetry of neurological signs help to prepare a list of 
differentials.
4.2 Physical examination
Detailed physical examination is very important to iden -
tify and localize the neurological problem ( LeCouteur, 
2009a). Neurological disorder can manifest as deficit in 
movement coordination, balance, hearing, and vision. In 
cats, hindquarters weakness may result from a potassium 
deficit rather than from spinal damage. A thorough physi -
cal examination should always be performed to rule out 
any potential causes or disorders that could appear like 
TABLE 3 Differential diagnosis for neurological disorders as per memory aid DAMN IT V .
Memory aid Signalment Onset and progression Neurological deficient
Degenerative Often adult Usually chronic progressive Symmetric or asymmetric
Anomalous Often purebred young Neonatal NP or chronic progressive Symmetric or asymmetric
Metabolic Any age, breed, gender Acute or chronic progressive Usually symmetric
Nutritional Any age, breed, gender Acute or chronic progressive Usually symmetric
Neoplastic Often adult Usually chronic progressive Often asymmetric occasionally 
symmetric
Inflammatory or infection Any age, breed, gender Acute or chronic progressive Often asymmetric occasionally 
symmetric
Idiopathic Varies with syndrome Acute or episodic Symmetric or asymmetric
Toxic Any age, breed, gender Acute progressive Usually symmetric
Traumatic Any age, breed, gender Acute NP Symmetric or asymmetric
Vascular Any age, breed, gender Acute NP Usually symmetric

242 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
primary  neurological conditions. Musculoskeletal issues, 
metabolic illnesses, and cardiac arrhythmias are the most 
frequent conditions they imitate like primary neurological 
problems.
4.3 Neurological examination
An evaluation of the head, cranial nerves, gait and posture, 
neck, thoracic, limb, back, pelvic limb, anus, and tail are 
all included in a neurological examination. Examining 
each of them reveals details about how the nervous sys -
tem functions generally and aids in determining the precise 
neurological condition. It is crucial to conduct a detailed, 
in-depth, and objective evaluation of the nervous system. 
To get the most out of the neurological examination, no 
sedatives or tranquilizers should be utilized, and the ani -
mal must be quiet and comfortable. The main goals of a 
neurological examination are to define the condition, lo -
cate the affected area, and assess the severity of the damage 
(LeCouteur, 2009a).
4.3.1 Evaluation of head
When evaluating the head, one should assess for appropri -
ate head posture as well as any signs of muscular atrophy, 
a head tilt, and symmetry in the face, ears, eyes, and lips 
(Fig. 1). A vestibular N problem is linked to a head tilt issue 
(CN VIII). Problems with the brain or diencephalon can be 
indicated by head pressing and head turning. Cranial nerve 
V motor branch dysfunction is indicated by atrophy of the 
temporal or master muscles. Any aberrant position or move-
ment of the eyes could be caused by cranial nerve paraly -
sis or paresis of CN III, IV , VI, or VIII, whereas abnormal 
drooping of the ears, lips, or eyelid is linked to CN VII pa -
ralysis or paresis. Atypical pupil size is caused by cranial 
nerve III paresis. Tremors and head coordination issues are 
caused by cerebellum-related problems.
4.3.2 Evaluation of cranial nerves
Several tests are used to assess the cranial nerves; a list of fre-
quently used reflexes is provided in Table 4. Each test’s proce-
dure is simple and highly efficient at assessing nerve function.
Palpebral reflex
The trigeminal and facial nerves are assessed using the pal-
pebral reflex, which should touch a fingertip on the medial 
canthus of the eye (Schubert, 2010) as shown in Fig. 2. The 
animal responds with a motor reaction (CN VII) by blinking 
if the sensation is present (CN V).
Menace response
The menace response is produced by abruptly approaching 
the eye with a hand or finger as if simulating a blow to the 
FIG. 1 Examination of symmetry in the face, ears, eyes, and lips.
TABLE 4 Preferred test for evaluation of cranial nerves.
Cranial 
nerve no. Nerve name Preferred test
I Olfactory nerve Smelling a non-irritating 
substance
II Optic nerve Menace response
Pupillary light reflex
Throw cotton piece in 
front of the animal
III Oculomotor nerve Pupillary—light reflex
Oculocephalic reflex
IV Trigeminal nerve Pinch—ear muscle
Lip corneal reflex
Palpebral reflex
Test jaw tone
V Abducens nerve Corneal reflex
VI Facial nerve Facial sensitivity test
Corneal reflex
Palpebral reflex
Schirmer tear test
VII Vestibulocochlear 
nerve
Auditory reflex
Occulocephalic reflex
VIII Glossopharyngeal 
nerve
Pharyngeal/swallowing 
reflex
IX Vagus nerve Pharyngeal reflex
Occulocardiac reflex
X Accessory nerve Palpation of neck muscle
XI Hypoglossal nerve Licking reflex
Retraction reflex

Diseases of the nervous system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 16  243
eyes as shown in Fig. 3. This test measures the integrity vi-
sion (CN-II) as well as the motor route (CN-VII) of the lids, 
which generally results in blinking of the eyelids in normal 
animals (Schubert, 2010).
Pupillary light reflex
In a dim area, a high-intensity light source is used to execute 
the reflex as shown in Fig. 4. The light should be focused on 
the fundus of the eye. The instantaneous reflex is evoked by 
constriction of the pupil in the eye being examined (direct 
reaction), as well as the pupil in the opposite eye (indirect 
or consensual response).
Corneal reflex
A corneal reflex is performed by softly touching the corneal 
surface with a wet cotton swab or finger. Retraction of the 
globe and blinking indicate appropriate functioning of the 
cranial nerve V ophthalmic branch, motor innervations of 
VII, and cranial nerve VI.
Oculo-cephalic reflex
The head is moved from side to side, then up and down, 
resulting in normal rhythmic lateral and vertical movement 
of the globe, known as physiological nystagmus. After each 
movement, the head should be stabilized and the nystagmus 
should be checked. If the eyes continue to move, positional 
nystagmus occurs, which is consistent with a vestibule-  
cochlear N lesion (CN VIII). Any irregular eye movement 
that is unrelated to head movements is referred to as “dolls 
eye movement” (Schubert, 2010). It is caused by a lesion in 
the CN-III, IV , VI, and VIII.
Occulocardiac reflex
To elicit reflex bradycardia, an occulocardiac reflex is 
effected by simultaneously applying digital pressure to 
both globes. If reflex bradycardia is present, it shows 
that the sensory response of cranial nerve V and the 
parasympathetic reflex of cranial nerve X is functioning 
normally.
FIG. 2 Palpebral reflex is tested by touching the medial canthus of the eye.
FIG. 3 Menace response is induced by quickly bringing a hand or finger up to the eye.

244 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
Jaw tone reflex
The jaw tone reflex is performed by opening and closing 
the mouth to test the integrity of the nerve that supplies the 
masticatory muscle (Schubert, 2010) as shown in Fig. 5.
Pharyngeal reflex or swallowing reflex
Inserting a finger or tongue depressor toward the pharynx 
causes a pharyngeal reflex. The presence of a swallowing or 
gag reaction shows that the cranial nerve IX is functioning 
appropriately (Schubert, 2010).
Licking reflex
The licking reflex is activated by moistening the tip of the 
nose as shown in Fig. 6. However, the animal licks indicate 
normal IX, X, and XII cranial nerve function.
FIG. 4 A high-intensity light source is employed in a dark environment to perform pupillary light reflex.
FIG. 5 Test of the jaw tone to determine the integrity of the nerve supply-
ing the masticatory muscle.
FIG. 6 Examining the IX, X, and XII cranial nerves by wetting the tip 
of the nose.

Diseases of the nervous system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 16  245
Retraction reflex
The animal’s tongue is gently pulled to one side to per -
form the reflex. If the animal resists pulling and retracts its 
tongue, cranial nerve XII is working normally.
Auditory reflex or clap test
By clapping hands behind the ears as shown in Fig. 7, au-
ditory reflex testing was performed to check cranial nerve 
VIII ( Schubert, 2010 ). Any movement or jumping of the 
animal suggests that the nerve is functioning normally as 
shown in Fig. 8.
Facial sensitivity tests
Pricking the face with a needle or pinching with a hemostat 
is used to perform facial sensitivity tests as shown in Fig. 9. 
A pain response shows that cranial nerves V and VII are 
functioning normally (Schubert, 2010).
Palpation of neck muscle
To assess for atrophy, the neck muscles, particularly the 
sternocephalicus, brachiocephalicus, and trapezius mus -
cles, are palpated. If muscle mass is normal, so is cranial 
nerve XI function.
FIG. 7 Clap your hands behind the ears to test for auditory reflexes.
FIG. 8 If the auditory system is still functional, the animal will react by 
turning, moving, or jumping.
FIG. 9 To test facial sensitivity, pinch the face using a hemostat.

246 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
4.3.3 Evaluation of gait and posture
To analyze the animal’s gait, observe the animal while it 
is roaming freely as shown in Fig. 10, which always pro -
vides significant information. To localize the lesion, com -
monly used tests include hemistand, hemiwalking, and 
wheelbarrowing.
In hemistand and hemiwalking, lift one side of the ani -
mal’s limbs and support the animal as shown in Fig.  11. 
Then gently push the animal forward and sideways to en -
courage the animal to walk on one side of its body. This aids 
in determining which side of the body is impacted. During 
wheelbarrowing, either the thoracic or pelvic limbs of the 
animal are lifted, allowing the animal to walk exclusively 
on its fore or hind limbs as shown in Figs. 12 and 13. This 
aids in determining whether the lesion is in the forequarter 
or the hindquarter.
Hopping and conscious proprioception are employed to 
assess postural reactions. Lifting three limbs, enabling the 
animal to stand and hop on only one limb is used to assess 
hopping.
By gently moving the animal laterally to see if they can 
walk or hop as shown in Fig. 14. To test conscious proprio-
ception, the dorsal surface of the animal paw is turned to 
make touch with the ground ( Schubert, 2010). If the ani -
mal’s proprioceptive function is good, it will restore its paw 
to its natural position in a few seconds. A lack of conscious 
proprioception indicates a neurological problem; this is not 
evident in orthopedic problems.
4.3.4 Evaluation of neck, thoracic, limb, back, 
pelvic limb, anus, and tail
The most often used procedures to evaluate the thoracic 
limb, back, pelvic limb, anus, and tail include spinal cord 
reflexes, Babinskis sign , and cutaneous trunci  response. 
FIG.  10 Examination of animal from a distance when it is roaming 
freely.
FIG. 11 Lift one side of the animal’s limbs and support it when doing a 
hemistand or hemiwalk.
FIG. 12 Wheelbarrowing to force the animal to walk solely on its hind 
limbs.

Diseases of the nervous system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 16  247
When an animal is relaxed and lying on to its lateral, the 
spinal reflexes are evaluated. Thoracolumbar lesions can be 
located more accurately by the pelvic limb spinal reflexes 
than by the thoracic limb reflexes. Various spinal reflexes of 
the thoracic and pelvic limbs are listed in Table 5.
4.4 Test on blood and serum
Blood and serum tests are crucial to determine whether 
other bodily systems or organs, such as the liver, kidneys, 
and heart, are involved in the emergence of neurologi -
cal symptoms or are dysfunctional. But it is important to 
choose these exams carefully. For instance, the diagnosis of 
hepatic encephalopathy, which can potentially result in neu-
rologic symptoms, depends on serum bile acids, albumin, 
the A/G ratio, aspartate aminotransferase, and total plasma 
protein. Similar to serum cholinesterase for poisoning with 
organ phosphorus and serum thyroxine and TSH levels for 
hypothyroidism.
FIG. 13 Wheelbarrowing to force the animal to walk solely on its forelimbs.
FIG.  14 Lifting three limbs of the animal and enabling the animal to 
stand and hop on only one limb.
TABLE 5 List the spinal reflexes of the thoracic and 
pelvic limbs.
SI no. Reflex Lesion location
Thoracic limbs
1 Biceps tendon reflex C6–C8 and 
musculocutaneous nerve
2 Triceps tendon reflex C7–T2 and radial nerve
3 Extensor carpi radialis 
reflex
C7–T2 and radial nerve
4 Flexor reflex/
withdrawal reflex/toe 
pinch reflex
Radial nerve, axillary 
nerve, ulnar nerve, 
musculocutaneous nerve 
median nerve
5 Crossed extensor reflex Lesion above: C7
Pelvic limbs
1 Patellar reflex L4–L5 and femoral nerve
2 Gastrocnemius reflex L6–S2 and tibial nerve
3 Cranial tibial reflex L6–S2 and sciatic nerve, 
peroneal nerve
4 Sciatic reflex L6–S2, sciatic nerve, 
peroneal nerve
5 Flexor reflex L6–S2, sciatic nerve, 
peroneal nerve
6 Crossed extensor reflex Above L6
7 Anal reflex S1–S4 and pudendal 
nerve
8 Tail reflex S1–Cd5 and caudal. N

248 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
4.5 Cerebrospinal fluid analysis
Ependymal cells of the choroid plexus, particularly through 
active transport processes, produce cerebrospinal fluid, 
which is then absorbed by arachnoid villi. The CNS is 
shielded from shock by the cerebrospinal fluid, which 
also nourishes the CNS parenchyma and aids in maintain -
ing intracranial pressure. CSF can be collected by lumbar 
puncture or the cerebellomedullary cistern. In general, the 
cerebellomedullary cistern is easier to execute, allows for 
more volume collection, and results in less blood contami -
nation (LeCouteur, 2009b). Some of the typical indications 
for cerebrospinal fluid examination include any inflamma -
tory or neoplastic condition, trauma, degenerative disorders, 
cord compression, and hydrocephalus. In cases of elevated 
intracranial pressure, brain herniation, mechanical instabil-
ity, fractures or subluxations of the cervical or cranial or -
gans, and anesthetic risk, the cerebrospinal fluid collection 
is contraindicated.
Cerebrospinal fluid often has a low protein and cell 
count. CSF produces coagulum or sediment when standing 
and is clear and colorless. The number of nucleated cells per 
liter is fewer than 5 × 106 they are sterile in culture and free 
of microbes. The range of specific gravity is 1.004–1.006. 
Total protein ranges between 8 and 30  mg% in dog and 8 
and 20 mg% in cat, albumin comprises about 80%–90% of 
total protein. Glucose concentration is roughly 60 mg/dL, or 
80% of plasma glucose concentration.
Idiopathic epilepsy, congenital hydrocephalus, func -
tional disorder, metabolic ailment, vertebral disease, and 
myelomalacia are a few situations when normal CSF is 
seen. A few CSF abnormalities and respective conditions 
are listed in Table 6.
4.6 Electroencephalography (EEG)
Electroencephalography is used to measure the electrical 
activity of the brain (Platt and Olby, 2015). EEG is noninva-
sive and painless. It can be used to diagnose conditions like 
hydrocephalus, encephalitis, head injuries, encephalopa -
thy, neoplasia, and epilepsy. EEG has a lot of diagnostic 
potential for diagnosing neurological disorders; it can de -
tect changes in brain activity over long periods of time and 
even after symptoms appear. EEG can be used to determine 
whether animals are at risk of developing neurological dis -
orders so that they can get early treatment. Unfortunately, 
EEG has never been used as a standard diagnostic proce -
dure in the treatment of canine and feline epilepsy.
4.7 Electromyography (EMG)
Electromyography measures the electrical activity of periph-
eral nerves and muscles ( LeCouteur, 2009b). This is very 
useful in locating nerve injuries, nerve root compression 
disorders of the neuromuscular junction and muscles, and 
peripheral nerves. EMG is usually performed using a needle 
electrode that is placed into the muscle and attached to an 
amplifier. These record the electrical activity of the muscle 
cells when they contract or relax. EMG is usually performed 
on the muscles of the face, limbs, and trunk, but can also 
be used to test nerve function in the brain. The test involves 
placing an electrode on a specific muscle or nerve (usually 
using local anesthesia) and recording its electrical activity.
4.8 Brainstem auditory evoked response (BAER)
The BAER test is used to evaluate the electrical activity of 
the auditory pathways through the brainstem. It can be used 
to diagnose hearing loss, evaluate nerve damage, and moni-
tor treatment for certain diseases that affect hearing and bal-
ance (Schubert, 2010). The test is typically performed by an 
audiologist who measures electrical activity in response to 
TABLE 6 List of cerebrospinal fluid abnormalities and 
common related diseases.
Parameter
Abnormal 
findings Associated condition
Appearance Bright red Hemorrhage at the time of 
puncture –contamination
Dull red/brown Recent/chronic Hg 
(intracranial) preceding 
collection
Yellow 
discoloration
Xanthochromia due 
to bilirubin or Hg 48 h 
previously
Gray/green 
discoloration
Suppurative infection
Cytology Increased RBC Pathological hemorrhage 
or contamination, trauma, 
erosive neoplasia, 
subarachnoid hemorrhage, 
and intracerebral 
hemorrhage
Increased WBC: 
Nucleated cell 
is known as 
pleocytosis
Infection
Specific 
gravity
Abnormality Parenchymal disease—
pathological change
Protein Increase Hemorrhage, neoplasia 
seizure, uremia, fever, 
GME, myelomalacia
Glucose Decreased Pyogenic infection, 
advanced neoplasia
Increased Diabetic mellitus, 
hyperglycemia

Diseases of the nervous system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 16  249
clicking sounds delivered through earphones that are placed 
on the patient’s ears. The BAER test can also be used to 
diagnose a condition called congenital deafness in which 
newborn puppies and kittens are unable to hear.
4.9 Spinal cord evoked response
Spinal cord evoked response is the recording of electrical ac-
tivity, which is generated by stimulation of the nerve. When 
a peripheral nerve is stimulated, an action potential travels 
along the axon and enters the spinal cord via the dorsal root 
ganglion. This generates an “evoked response” in the spi -
nal cord, which can be recorded using surface electrodes or 
needle electrodes. A typical evoked response consists of a 
series of peaks, each corresponding to a different compo -
nent of the nerve fiber. These peaks are called compound 
action potentials (CAPs). Spinal cord evoked response is 
useful in diagnosing nerve root and spinal cord lesion.
4.10 Routine radiography
In veterinary medicine, radiography is the most often uti -
lized imaging technology. It is noninvasive, inexpensive, 
and gives a fast diagnosis of the majority of musculoskeletal 
disorders. Radiography is a significant tool in neurological 
examinations for finding abnormalities, fractures, neopla -
sia, and bone infection. It can also be utilized to detect de -
generation and infection in the intervertebral disc, which 
are the causes of nervous symptoms.
4.11 Myelography
The technique involves the injection of a radiopaque con -
trast medium into the subarachnoid space at the level of 
 interest under fluoroscopic guidance and visualizes the spi-
nal canal and surrounding structures ( LeCouteur, 2009b). 
This is done by injecting a contrast material (iohexol) into 
the spinal cord through a needle that goes into the sub -
arachnoid space. The contrast material is then visualized on 
X-rays or CT scans. This test is used to diagnose spinal cord 
tumors, fractures, infections, and other conditions affecting 
the spinal cord.
4.12 Computed tomography (CT)
Computed tomography is a noninvasive imaging technique 
used to assess internal structures and organs of the body. 
The procedure involves taking multiple X-rays from dif -
ferent angles, which are then compiled by a computer into 
cross-sectional images of the area being studied as shown 
in Fig.  15. As contrast media, diatrizoate meglumine and 
diatrizoate sodium are utilized. CT scans are quite useful in 
detecting acute bleeding and determining bone detail.
4.13 Magnetic resonance imaging (MRI)
Under a strong magnetic field, magnetic resonance imaging 
captures several plane pictures as shown in Fig.  16. It is 
better for soft tissue than CT, and intravenous gadolinium is 
used to identify an impaired blood-brain barrier.
4.14 Surgical biopsy
Surgical biopsy is an uncommon procedure that involves re-
moving a lesion for diagnostic purposes. A surgical biopsy 
is suggested for the diagnosis of meningoencephalopa -
thies, peripheral neuropathies, and neoplasia of the nervous 
system.
FIG. 15 A 6-year-old German Shepherd dog is being prepared for a CT scan to rule out cervical spondylosis.

250 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
5 Common affections of the nervous 
system in small animals
1. Epilepsy
2. Paralysis
3. Meningitis/encephalitis/meningoencephalitis
4. Encephalomalacia
5.1 Epilepsy
Definition of epileptic seizure
Epidemiology of epileptic seizure
Common causes of epileptic seizure
Pathophysiology of epileptic seizure
Classification of epileptic seizure
Stages of epileptic seizure
Clinical signs of epileptic seizure
Differential diagnosis of epileptic seizure
Diagnosis of epileptic seizure
Management of epilepsy
Antiepileptic drugs (AED)
Nutritional management
Refractory epilepsy
Status epilepticus and cluster epilepsy
5.1.1 Definition of epileptic seizure
A clinical manifestation of excessive and/or hypersyn -
dromic neuronal activity in the cerebral cortex is an epileptic 
seizure. Epilepsy is a condition characterized by frequent, 
irregular seizures. An intermittent electrical disturbance in 
the brain manifests itself externally as a seizure, ictus, fit, 
or convulsion. The main distinction between a seizure and 
epilepsy is that a seizure only occurs once, but epilepsy is a 
neurological disorder marked by two or more spontaneous 
seizures.
Greek term epilepsia, which means to take, seize, or at-
tack, is the root of the English word epilepsy. Hippocrates 
(460–377 BC) thought that the brain should be the source of 
epileptic convulsions ( Vite and Braund, 2010 ). According 
to distinct symptoms, epileptic convulsions were classified 
by Calmeil (1824). Later, epilepsy was divided into many 
categories by neurologist John Hughlings Jackson based 
on anatomical localization, physiological imbalance, and 
pathological process.
5.1.2 Epidemiology of epileptic seizure
The most prevalent neurological condition affecting dogs 
and cats is epilepsy. Epilepsy prevalence in the canine popu-
lation has been estimated to range from 0.5% to 5.0%, while 
it is roughly 0.5% in the cat population ( Vite and Braund, 
2010). In male dogs, a slightly greater prediction of epilepsy 
was noted. German Shepherds, Boxers, Cocker Spaniels, 
Labrador Retrievers, Beagles, Dachshunds, Keeshound, 
Vizla, and Shetland sheepdogs are particularly susceptible 
to genetic forms of epilepsy.
5.1.3 Common causes of epileptic seizure
There are numerous causes of epilepsy in dogs and cats. 
Congenital and familial problems, infections and inflam -
mation, metabolic disorders, neoplasia (cancer), nutritional 
disorders, and toxicities are the most common causes of 
epilepsy in dogs and cats. The most prevalent type is idio -
pathic epilepsy, which means that no cause can be found.
Genetics can cause epilepsy in dogs and cats. If a dog 
or cat is born with a genetic predisposition, seizures can be 
triggered by stress or illness. A variety of factors, includ -
ing genetic, congenital defects, or birth trauma, can cause 
congenital and familial epilepsy in dogs and cats. Canine 
idiopathic epilepsy, familial canine epilepsy, epilepsy as -
sociated with hippocampus atrophy or malformation, hy -
drocephalus, lysosomal storage disease, and lissencephaly 
are the congenital and familial disorders leading to epilepsy 
in dogs. Infections and inflammations such as rabies, ca -
nine distemper, feline polio encephalomyelitis, rickettsial 
meningoencephalitis, FIV , FIP, and FeLV can all cause epi-
lepsy in dogs and cats. The Clostridium bacteria are also a 
cause of epilepsy in dogs and cats. Epilepsy can be caused 
by metabolic problems such as calcium and magnesium de-
ficiency, hypoglycemia, hypoxia, and hepatic encephalopa-
thy. Toxicities of copper, lead, arsenic, OPC, chlorinated 
HC-DDT, BHC, and PCBs have been associated with epi -
lepsy in dogs and cats.
FIG. 16 A 7-year-old Great Dane is being prepared for an MRI to rule 
out cerebral hemorrhage.

Diseases of the nervous system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 16  251
Nutrition is thought to play a significant impact in this 
condition. If an animal does not receive adequate nutrients, 
it may develop neurological problems depending on the 
duration degree of deficiency. Epilepsy can be caused by 
a lack of vitamin B1, B6, B12, vitamin C, Omega-3 fatty 
acids, hypocalcemia, hyponatremia, hypochloremia, hyper-
phosphatemia, vitamin D deficiency, and taurine deficiency. 
The brain is the organ in the body that requires the most ox-
ygen. Neurons are extremely sensitive to variations in blood 
flow and oxygen levels. When there is a lack of oxygen or 
a decrease in blood flow to the central nervous system, the 
brain is deprived of oxygen, resulting in epilepsy. Trauma, 
vascular disorders, ischemia, and bleeding into the brain 
can deprive the neurons of oxygen, resulting in epilepsy. 
The most frequent form of neoplasia that produces seizures 
in canines and felines is brain tumors. Slowly expanding 
over time, they exert pressure on adjacent structures that 
may cause seizure activity. Meningioma is a form of tumor 
that arises from the tissues that cover the central nervous 
system, the meninges (CNS), which is a benign brain tumor 
but a deadly, aggressive kind of brain cancer. With a median 
age of onset of 6  years old, it most frequently affects dogs 
in their middle to later years. Another form of tumor of the 
central nervous system is ependymomas. Ependymomas 
can form anywhere in the brain or spinal cord; however, 
they are most frequently detected in the spinal cord.
5.1.4 Pathophysiology of epileptic seizure
Normal brain cells communicate with one another via elec-
trical and chemical signals. This communication is either 
excitatory or inhibitory. There is a balance between these 
two; anything that causes an imbalance between these two 
can be a potential cause of epilepsy. Epilepsy is caused by a 
cluster of nerve cells that are physically normal but electri-
cally abnormal or dysfunctional. As long as the abnormal 
discharge does not exceed the threshold level, there will be 
no problem. Every neural tissue has an excitability thresh -
old. If it exceeds the threshold level, neuronal depolarization 
occurs, which spreads to neighboring neurons and causes 
epilepsy. Other possible mechanisms for epileptic seizures 
in dogs and cats include abnormalities in the structure or 
function of ion channels, abnormalities in intracellular cal -
cium signaling pathways, increased effect of excitatory neu-
rotransmitters like glutamate, disruption of the blood-brain 
barrier, decreased effect of inhibitory neurotransmitters like 
GABA, and decreased blood flow to the brain.
5.1.5 Classification of epileptic seizure
Human seizures have classification systems; however, there 
is no commonly accepted classification system for seizures 
in dogs and cats. In small animal practice, the human clas -
sification system is occasionally used to explain seizures; 
however, this often leads to confusion because of subjective 
variations.
Epilepsy classification is based on etiology : Epilepsy 
is classified into three categories based on etiology as id -
iopathic epilepsy, symptomatic epilepsy, and cryptogenic 
epilepsy (Vite and Braund, 2010).
Idiopathic epilepsy: It is the most prevalent type and is an 
inherited disorder that can be familial (genetic) or congeni-
tal (present at birth). Idiopathic epilepsy is epilepsy caused 
by an unknown factor in which there is no anatomical brain 
abnormality. Clinically and neurologically, animals suffer -
ing from idiopathic epilepsy will appear normal between 
the two epilepsies. Idiopathic epilepsy is also known as true 
epilepsy, genetic epilepsy, and inherited epilepsy.
Symptomatic epilepsy : head injury, congenital anoma -
lies, storage illness, CNS infection, brain tumor, and sur -
gery can all cause symptomatic epilepsy. In symptomatic 
epilepsy, structural changes/pathology of the cerebrum is 
found, and the pathophysiology is well understood. There 
are two types of symptomatic epilepsy: focal symptomatic 
epilepsy and generalized symptomatic epilepsy. The etiol -
ogy of focal symptomatic epilepsy is structural lesions in 
the brain, which mainly affect one hemisphere of the cere -
brum. In contrast, generalized symptomatic epilepsy affects 
both hemispheres of the cerebrum. Symptomatic epilepsy 
is also known as secondary epilepsy and acquired epilepsy.
Cryptogenic epilepsy: it is a type of seizure disorder that 
cannot be explained by structural abnormalities in the brain 
and whose suspected cause remains obscure or hidden.
Epileptic seizures are classified into two types based on 
the involvement of cerebral hemispheres: primary general -
ized seizures and partial/focal seizures ( Vite and Braund, 
2010).
Primary generalized seizures: An epileptic seizure that 
displays early symptoms of activity involving both hemi -
spheres of the brain. The seizure primarily manifests in 
dogs and cats as sudden “convulsions” and unconscious -
ness. In addition, convulsions frequently involve salivation, 
urine, and/or excrement. Seizures that are atonic or myo -
clonic may also occur (though uncommon). Convulsions 
will always be involved in primary generalized seizures. 
Grand mal or generalized epileptic seizures are other names 
for primary generalized seizures.
Partial/focal seizures: A type of epileptic seizure that 
displays clinical symptoms and has its origins in a specific 
region of the brain. Focal motor, autonomic, or behavioral 
signs may appear alone or in combination with this type of 
seizure. The alternative names for partial/focal seizures are 
petit mal and focal epileptic seizure. Simple partial/focal 
seizures and complex partial/focal seizures are two general 
categories of focal seizures based on the level of conscious-
ness. Simple partial/focal seizures do not impair conscious-
ness, whereas complex partial/focal seizures cause the 
animal to lose consciousness.
Focal/partial seizures can evolve to become focal sei -
zure with secondary generalization. Focal seizure with sec-
ondary generalization is an epileptic episode that begins

252 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
in a localized area of the cerebral cortex and then extends 
to both hemispheres. Seizures in dogs and cats begin with 
localized motor, autonomic, and/or behavioral symptoms, 
followed by convulsions. Convulsions are frequently ac -
companied by salivation, urine, and/or feces.
5.1.6 Stages of epileptic seizure
Seizures differ in etiology and involvement of cerebral 
hemispheres, although they frequently follow the same pat-
tern. A seizure has four distinct phases: prodromal, early 
ictal (the “aura”), ictal, and postictal (Brewer, 2017).
In the prodrome stage, mood and behavior changes oc -
cur hours and days before the onset of true seizures. In the 
aura stage, the animal exhibits initial manifestations of sei-
zures such as licking, shivering, vomiting, urination, bark -
ing, and psychic occurrences. This period occurs between 
minutes and hours before the commencement of actual sei-
zures. It is quite difficult to distinguish between prodrome 
and aura stages in animals.
Actual seizure activity takes place during the stage of ic-
tus, which typically lasts for minutes to seconds. The brain 
tissue undergoes significant electrical changes during this 
time. The last phase, known as post-ictus, follows an ac -
tive seizure. Animals may experience thirst, an increase in 
appetite, and occasionally, blindness during this period of 
recovery. How long it takes for an animal to get back to nor-
mal depends on the type of seizure and the area of the brain 
that is affected. This stage often lasts from a few seconds to 
several days.
5.1.7 Clinical signs of epileptic seizure
Generalized seizures : Both dogs and cats are frequently 
diagnosed with generalized seizures. Because neurons on 
both sides of the cerebral cortex discharge electrical activ -
ity, the clinical signs of this type are diffused and bilater -
ally symmetrical, indicating that the entire brain is involved. 
Aura may or may not be present at the grand mal stage, but 
the animal will be unconscious, may fall to its side, and 
cries out what is known as an epileptic cry. Although there 
is no pain, an epileptic cry results from the constriction of 
larynx muscles and the gushing of air out. Head, neck, limb, 
face, and jaw muscles will all be symmetrically rigid at the 
same time. Animals may not be able to breathe, and if the 
body fails to get enough oxygen, their mucous membranes 
turn cyanotic. The characteristic of generalized epilepsy is 
that the animal recovers by urinating and defecating after 
the epilepsy.
Focal or partial seizure: The signs of a focal or partial 
seizure depend on which part of the cerebral cortex is ex -
hibiting aberrant electrical activity. There are three types 
of motor epilepsy: focal, psychomotor, and generalized. 
With no loss of consciousness, twitches in focal motor epi-
lepsy are restricted to one part of the body. Animals with 
 generalized motor seizures lose consciousness while mov -
ing their bodies in a gross way. There will be noticeable 
behavioral alterations in psychomotor epilepsy, either after 
the generalized motor seizure or during the seizure.
5.1.8 Differential diagnosis of epileptic 
seizure
The first step is to check that the owner’s description of 
the incident is indeed a seizure. Because the animal will 
be rarely presented during the ictal stage/period, a full his -
tory should be gathered to establish it as a seizure and to 
rule out other conditions that could be confused for seizure. 
Narcolepsy, spinal pain, cataplexy, syncope, tremors, and 
behavioral abnormalities are common conditions mistaken 
as epilepsy and may provide a diagnostic problem since they 
involve signs that are very common in epilepsy. Anemia, 
hepatic failure, renal dysfunction, hyperthyroidism in cats, 
hypoglycemia, electrolyte imbalances, myasthenia gravis, 
and intoxication are all potential causes of epilepsy. These 
disorders should be explored in the differential diagnosis of 
epilepsy.
Sudden falls and consciousness disturbances are hall -
marks of narcolepsy. Sleep often lasts between a few 
minutes and 20  min. Cataplexy is a sudden reduction of 
muscular tone in an awake animal that results in loss of 
voluntary muscle control. It lasts only a short while, and 
symptoms range from weakness to unexpected falling. 
The animal regains consciousness following the incident. 
Syncope is a brief loss of consciousness brought on by a 
reduction in blood flow to the brain. A thorough clinical his-
tory, in conjunction with physical and neurological exams, 
should be able to distinguish these episodic occurrences 
from seizure activity.
5.1.9 Diagnosis of epileptic seizure
Neurological issues in dogs and cats cannot be diagnosed 
with a single test alone; numerous diagnostic techniques 
must be used. A thorough physical and neurological ex -
amination, hematology, biochemistry, urine analysis, and 
survey radiographs of the abdomen and thorax are the 
minimal preliminary requirements for diagnosing epilepsy 
in small animal patients. The likelihood of discovering the 
cause is great if it is extracranial. When idiopathic epilepsy 
is suspected, all other potential causes should be ruled out. 
A thorough record of the incident should be obtained from 
the owner. Information should be gathered from the owner 
should include current medications, vaccination, deworm -
ing details, history of trauma or head injuries, a current 
medical issue, age at first seizure, frequency of seizures, and 
any febrile reactions. It is recommended to utilize a stan -
dardized questionnaire to gather all of these data more ef -
fectively and consistently. In situations indicating an active 
brain problem, the cerebrospinal fluid should be analyzed

Diseases of the nervous system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 16  253
since CNS pathology may be reflected in the cerebrospinal 
fluid. Computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI) have been extremely useful in the diagnosis 
and treatment of epilepsy in animals.
5.1.10 Management of epileptic seizure
The therapeutic management of epileptic seizures is diffi -
cult and requires multiple hospital visits and medicines to 
manage the condition. When to begin antiepileptic therapy 
is crucial, and this decision is based on a number of fac -
tors. Antiepileptic therapy is typically started when an ani -
mal experiences more than two seizures within a 6-month 
period, when postepileptic symptoms are severe, when the 
seizure itself is severe, or when an animal experiences sta -
tus epilepticus or cluster epilepticus (Brewer, 2017). Owner 
compliance must be considered prior to beginning therapy, 
and if the owner strongly requests antiepileptic therapy, 
treatment may be started.
Antiepileptic drugs (AED)
Antiepileptic medications are administered over a lon -
ger period of time, so the ideal antiepileptic medication 
should be affordable, without any adverse effects, and 
have a long half-life to minimize the need for repeated oral 
doses. Unfortunately, no antiepileptic medicine currently 
on the market will meet all of the aforementioned require -
ments. Antiepileptic therapy’s primary goal is to decrease 
seizure frequency and duration as well as postepileptic 
consequences.
Phenobarbital sodium/phenobarbital
Phenobarbital belongs to the barbiturates class of medi -
cines. Barbiturates are CNS depressants; the degree of 
CNS depression is determined by the dose, method of ad -
ministration, drug pharmacokinetics, and species treated. 
Barbiturates do not have true analgesic action intrinsi -
cally. Barbiturates should be used with caution in cats due 
to their sensitivity to the respiratory depressive effects of 
barbiturates.
Despite being an older medication, many veterinar -
ians still use phenobarbital as the first-line treatment for 
epilepsy in dogs and cats due to its effectiveness, afford -
ability, capacity to treat epilepsy at low doses, and relative 
safety. Phenobarbital has a 90% bioavailability in dogs fol-
lowing oral administration. The drug is processed in the 
liver before being eliminated through the kidney. Dog and 
cat elimination half-lives range from 12 to 125  h and 34 to 
43 h, respectively. In patients with anemia, hypovolemia, 
cardiac or respiratory disease, and hypoadrenal function, 
phenobarbital should be used with caution. Patients with 
liver problems or animals with high barbiturate sensitivity 
should not administer phenobarbital. Dogs frequently expe-
rience a variety of negative side effects, such as anxiety or 
lethargy, depression, sedation, ataxia, polydipsia, polyuria, 
and polyphagia (Mandigers, 2013). In cats, weight gain and 
polydipsia/polyuria are the most often reported adverse ef -
fects. Oral administration of activated charcoal aids in the 
removal of the drug from the body in cases of phenobarbital 
toxicity.
Dosage advice for dogs : At first, administer 2–4  mg/kg 
PO in 2–3 doses per day. If ineffective, doses may be gradu-
ally increased up to a maximum of 18–20  mg/kg/day (di-
vided 2–3 times a day). Seizures may occur if the medicine 
is abruptly stopped.
Dosage advice for cats: The initial dose is 2 (1–2.5) mg/
kg every 12 h. Serum levels should be taken into consider -
ation before making any changes in the dosage.
Potassium bromide/KBr
Alkali metal bromides are a group of inorganic chemicals 
that includes potassium bromide, often known as kalium 
bromide or KBr. Potassium bromide is frequently utilized 
in patients suffering from phenobarbital hepatotoxicity. 
This is used as a primary antiepileptic medication as well 
as an adjuvant medication in conjunction with pheno -
barbital or primidone. KBr is absorbed in the small in -
testine, has a bioavailability of 60%–100% in dogs, and 
is eliminated through the kidney. In dogs and cats, the 
half-life is around 16–25  days and 10  days, respectively. 
The most common side effects described are sedation, 
polyphagia, polydipsia, polyuria, anorexia, vomiting, and 
constipation.
Dosage advice for dogs : Loading dose of 400–600  mg/
kg/day divided and administered with food it can be given 
over the course of 24  h or more gradually over the course 
of 5  days. Then proceed to the initial maintenance dose: 
20–30 mg/kg PO once a day.
Dosage advice for cats: 30 mg/kg PO once daily.
Phenytoin sodium
In dogs and cats, phenytoin is not often used as an antiepi -
leptic medication. In dogs, bioavailability after oral dosing 
is around 40%. It is metabolized in the liver and eliminated 
through the kidney. Phenytoin has a half-life of 2–8  h in 
dogs and 42–108 h in cats. Anorexia, vomiting, ataxia, and 
sedation are frequent side effects in dogs. Chronic ther -
apy patients also had hepatotoxicity and gingival hyper -
plasia. Cats suffer from ataxia, drowsiness, and anorexia. 
Thrombocytopenia and dermal atrophy syndrome were also 
seen in cats. Because the phenytoin accumulates easily in 
cats and can lead to toxicity, its usage in cats remains con -
troversial. The dose for treating epilepsy in cats is 2–3  mg/
kg daily PO, with a maximum of 20  mg/kg per week. 
Phenytoin must be administered regularly in dogs due to its 
short half-life; the recommended dose is 15–40  mg/kg PO 
three times each day.

254 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
Primidone
Primidone, a phenobarbital precursor, should not be admin-
istered to dogs that have a liver illness or who are sensitive 
to primidone. Because primidone has a high incidence of 
hepatotoxicity and behavioral side effects, many neurolo -
gists do not advise using it to control seizures. Primidone 
is thought to be more harmful to cats than to canines. 
Recommended dose for dogs: To start, administer 10–
30 mg/kg daily divided into 2–3 doses. Recommended dose 
for cats, take 11–22 mg/kg three times a day.
Diazepam
Diazepam is a benzodiazepine anxiolytic, muscle relax -
ant, hypnotic, appetite stimulant, and anticonvulsant drug. 
Diazepam is a lipid-soluble drug that is metabolized in the 
liver and excreted in the urine. Diazepam bioavailability 
varies depending on the species and route of administra -
tion. In dogs and cats, the serum half-life is 2.5–3.2 and 
5.5 h, respectively. Diazepam should be used with caution in 
animals with hepatic or renal disease, as well as in geriatric 
or debilitated animals. Diazepam is used as a second-line 
medication for oral maintenance management of seizures in 
cats. It is given at a dose of 0.5–1 mg/kg PO every 12 h. Dogs 
are given 1–2 mg/kg PO every 12 h, with the most prevalent 
side effects being sedation and polyphagia. Long-term di -
azepam dosing is ineffective because tolerance builds fast.
Nutritional management
Diet is frequently overlooked while managing canine and 
feline epilepsy. The brain’s main energy source is glucose. 
The brain cannot store anything, thus it needs a constant 
flow of glucose. Energy metabolism may be compromised 
in epileptogenic brain regions; hence, it is recommended to 
use sources of energy other than glucose that are not depen-
dent on pyruvate dehydrogenase activity. In rodent seizure 
models, dogs, and humans with epilepsy, medium-chain 
triglycerides offer medium-chain fatty acids (MCFAs) 
and ketones as auxiliary brain energy and can lower sei -
zures. Additionally, ketones and medium-chain fatty acids 
enhance brain mitochondrial activity and antioxidant de -
fense (Han et al., 2021). A sudden change in diet should be 
avoided in pets on anticonvulsant drugs, and new foods and 
ingredients should be introduced gradually.
5.1.11 Refractory epilepsy
When a patient’s quality of life is impaired by frequent 
or severe seizures or pharmaceutical side effects, epilepsy 
is considered to be refractory. Refractory epilepsy affects 
about one-third of dogs with epilepsy, making it a signifi -
cant issue in small animal medicine. For the treatment of 
refractory seizures in veterinary patients, a number of an -
tiepileptic medications have been studied, including ga -
bapentin, zonisamide, levetiracetam, and pregabalin ( Platt, 
2008). These antiepileptic medicines are frequently used in 
conjunction with main medications such as potassium bro -
mide and phenobarbital sodium (Table 7).
5.1.12 Status epilepticus and cluster epilepsy
Status epilepticus is characterized by continuous seizure ac-
tivity lasting more than 5 min or by the occurrence of more 
than one seizure within 5  min without an intervening inter-
val of normalcy. It can sometimes last 20–30 min or longer. 
In cluster epilepticus, a seizure occurs several times a day 
with at least 2  h of intervening period of normalcy, where 
the animal regains its consciousness and nervous system 
functions return to the baseline (Scislowicz, 2015).
Status epilepticus could have cluster epilepsy as a pre -
cursor. Approximately 60% of epileptic dogs will develop 
status epilepsy at some time in their life. The prognosis for 
status epilepticus is poor, about 25% of the hospitalized dogs 
will not survive until hospital discharge (Rossmeisl, 2013).
The goal of status epilepticus management is to stabilize 
the patient, stop the seizure activity, and minimize or correct 
the negative effects of status epilepticus. Standard anticon -
vulsant and anesthetic medications are administered intra -
venously (IV) to treat status epilepticus. To stop the seizure 
activity, diazepam, lorazepam, levetiracetam, midazolam, 
and ketamine are most frequently utilized. Mannitol is given 
intravenously at a dose of 0.25–1 g/kg to prevent side effects 
like neuronal necrosis, increased intracranial pressure, and 
cerebral edema. Additional diagnostic tests, such as MRI, 
EEG, and thorough hematobiochemical examination, may 
be performed once the patient has first stabilized.
5.2 Paralysis
Paralysis refers to a loss of neurological control of the pe -
ripheral organs, particularly the limbs. Paralysis may entail 
the loss of sensory function or motor function or some -
times both functions. There will be no voluntary move -
ment during the paralysis period. Infections (such as rabies 
and canine distemper), trauma, tumors, cysts, increased 
TABLE 7 Dosage details about add-on drugs used in the 
management of refractory epilepsy.
Name of the drug Dosage for dogs Dosage for cats
Gabapentin 
(Muñana, 2013)
10–20 mg/kgq6–8 h 5–10 mg/kgq8–
12 h
Levetiracetam 
(Muñana, 2013)
20 mg/kgq8h 20 mg/kgq8h
Pregabalin 
(Muñana, 2013)
3–4 mg/kgq8h 1–2 mg/kgq12h
Zonisamide 
(Muñana, 2013)
5–10 mg/kgq12h 5 mg/kgq12–24 h

Diseases of the nervous system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 16  255
 intracranial pressure, fracture of the skull/vertebral column, 
IVD protrusion, toxicities, and deficient diseases can all 
cause paralysis.
Spastic or flaccid paralysis is possible. The affected 
limb or part of the body will be contracted in spastic paraly-
sis, which is frequent in upper motor neuron paralysis. The 
affected area in flaccid paralysis will be relaxed, as seen in 
lower motor neuron disorders.
Paralysis is further classified based on the affected limb. 
Monoplegia is the paralysis of only one limb of an animal. 
In diplegia, animals’ two limbs are paralyzed. Hemiplegia 
is the paralysis of one side of the body’s limbs. Paraplegia is 
the paralysis of both rear limbs. Quadriplegia is the paraly-
sis of all four limbs.
5.2.1 Management of paralysis
The treatment is determined by the underlying cause. In 
general, nursing care is particularly important in the man -
agement of paralysis since the animal may develop bed 
sores due to a lack of voluntary movement; adequate bed -
ding should be provided to avoid/reduce the risks of bed 
sores. Along with physiotherapy (massage or/and swim -
ming), vitamin and mineral supplements are essential for 
improving nerve function. Acupuncture, laser therapy, and 
infrared therapy have also been demonstrated to aid in the 
rehabilitation of paralyzed limbs.
5.3 Meningitis/encephalitis/
meningoencephalitis
Meningitis is an inflammation of the meninges character -
ized by high body temperature, hyperesthesia, and muscle 
rigidity, particularly in the neck muscles. Encephalitis 
is a brain inflammation that begins with hyperexcitabil -
ity and progresses to paralysis and unconsciousness. 
Meningoencephalitis is characterized by inflammation 
of both the brain and the spinal cord in the same animal. 
Meningitis symptoms usually appear before encephalitis 
symptoms (John J Callanan, mSD).
Meningoencephalitis is uncommon when compared to 
infections of other organs. This is due to increased protec -
tion afforded to the nervous system by its barrier, rather 
than a lack of infectious pathogens. Infections of the neu -
rological system are frequently the result of an injury to the 
protective barrier. Sinusitis, otitis media or interna, spinal 
osteomyelitis, or discospondylitis can all cause direct exten-
sion of bacterial or mycotic infection to the CNS. Iatrogenic 
infections are possible from infected spinal needle or surgi-
cal tools. Bacterial endocarditis and septicemia are the pri -
mary source of CNS infection in dogs.
5.3.1 Etiology
The causes of meningitis, encephalitis, and encephalomy -
elitis are roughly characterized as bacterial, viral,  parasitic, 
fungal, protozoal, and idiopathic/immune-mediated. 
Infectious causes such as bacterial infections, viral infec -
tions, parasitic infections, protozoal infections, and fun -
gal infections can begin elsewhere in the body and enter 
the central nervous system via the sinuses, ear canal, or 
bloodstream, resulting in meningitis/encephalitis. Feline 
infectious peritonitis (FIP), cryptococcosis, and toxoplas -
mosis are the most prevalent causes of meningitis in cats. 
Leptospirosis, canine distemper, and rabies are the most 
common causes of central nervous system infection in 
dogs.
Idiopathic/immune-mediated CNS disease is a group of 
sporadic inflammatory diseases of the brain or spinal cord 
in the absence of infections or infectious agent. Based on 
histopathology results, three kinds of idiopathic/immune-
mediated CNS disease are recognized. Granulomatous 
meningoencephalitis, also known as inflammatory reticulo-
sis, neoplastic reticulosis, and lymphoreticulosis, is a kind 
of Idiopathic/immune-mediated CNS disease. It is most 
frequent in dogs aged 4–8  years old and affects all types 
and sizes. Necrotizing encephalitis is widespread from 
4 months to 10  years and is mostly seen in smaller breeds 
like Yorkshire Terriers and Bulldogs. Necrotizing meningo-
encephalitis, often known as Pug dog encephalitis, is a kind 
of meningoencephalitis. Pug, Chihuahua, Maltese, Terriers, 
Shih Tzu, and Pekinese are the most prevalent breeds be -
tween 6 months and 7 years old.
5.3.2 Clinical signs
Common meningitis signs include the acute onset of fever 
and chills, restlessness, and excitement brought on by mo -
tor irritability. Tonic neck and head spasms, as well as limb 
twitching, notably below the elbow and in the flank area. 
Tremor, convulsion, coma, uncoordinated gait, pressing of 
the head, and slow and irregular movement are the other 
signs. Typically, a disease course lasts 2–10 days.
Fever, altered mental status, circling, head pressing, 
clonic convulsion, muscular tremor, hyperesthesia, champ-
ing of the jaw, ataxia, and nystagmus are among the com -
mon signs of encephalitis.
5.3.3 Diagnosis and treatment
The utilization of history, clinical symptoms, CSF analysis, 
and imaging methods like MRI enables the most accurate 
and trustworthy diagnosis. To pinpoint the precise causes, 
serological tests, hematobiochemical analysis, and culture 
studies are also helpful.
Treatment depends on the underlying cause; neverthe -
less, antibiotics including ampicillin, metronidazole, tet -
racycline, fluoroquinolone, cephalosporins (third), and 
trimethoprim-sulfa are necessary to combat bacterial infec-
tions. To attain and sustain concentration in the CNS, higher 
dosages than usual are required, with bactericidal medica -
tions recommended over bacteriostatic ones.

256 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
5.4 Encephalomalacia
Encephalomalacia is a type of brain degeneration char -
acterized by demyelination, necrosis, and edema. 
Encephalomalacia causes brain tissue to soften. 
Encephalomalacia is divided into two types: leuco encepha-
lomalacia and polio encephaloma. The degeneration of 
white matter of the brain is known as leuco encephalomala-
cia, whereas the degeneration of gray matter of brain tissue 
is known as polio encephalomalacia.
5.4.1 Etiopathogenesis
Hepatic diseases that are either acquired or congenital can 
cause encephalomalacia. In acquired or congenital hepatic 
diseases, elevated amounts of ammonia and other toxic com-
pounds in the bloodstream may result in the degeneration of 
brain tissue. In lysosomal storage disease, a lack of lyso -
somal enzymes causes cellular substrates to build up and 
interfere with normal cell activity. One of the main causes 
of encephalomalacia is hypoxia and ischemia. Neurons are 
the brain tissue’s most susceptible components to hypoxia 
and ischemia. Necrosis of neurons and glial components 
occurs in hypoxia and ischemia. Different levels of brain 
tissue edema and degeneration can be caused by poison -
ing with lead, arsenic, mercury, salt toxicity, agriculture 
chemicals, antifreeze, herbicides, insecticides, and endo -
toxins. Encephalomalacia is also known to be caused by a 
deficiency of vitamin A, thiamine, vitamin E, and selenium.
5.4.2 Clinical signs
Common symptoms include varied degrees of paralysis, 
dullness, blindness, ataxia, head pressing, circling, muscu -
lar tremor, opisthotonus, convulsions, and coma. The dis -
ease can manifest itself in either an acute or chronic form. 
Muscle tremor, frothy salivation, champing of the jaw, head 
pressing, tonic and clonic convulsions, and nystagmus are 
noticed in the acute form, followed by death within 24 h. In 
the chronic form, common signs include anorexia, gait in 
coordination, circling, and head pressing.
5.4.3 Diagnosis and treatment
Encephalomalacia is diagnosed based on clinical findings 
and laboratory testing. Blood will have higher amounts of 
pyruvate and lactate and lower levels of thiamine in en -
cephalomalacia. There will be an increase in intracranial 
pressure. A uniform swelling and softening of the brain, as 
well as cavitations and laminar necrosis of the cortex, were 
found during the postmortem examination. Because en -
cephalomalacia is an irreversible disorder, only supportive 
care is provided. Along with thiamine and liver stimulants 
supplementation, measures should be taken to lower intra -
cranial pressure.

257

Chapter 17
Diseases of integument system  
of dogs and cats
Superficial pyoderma is seen most commonly affecting 
the outermost layers of the epidermis. It is subdivided into 
(a) acute moist dermatitis and (b) Intertrigo complex.
Acute moist dermatitis: It is a rapidly progressive super-
ficial bacterial infection of animals caused by self-inflicted 
trauma, which may include licking, rubbing, or chewing 
due to flea and lice infestation, allergy, ear infection, local 
pain or irritation, dental problems, injection reaction, poor 
coat condition, inadequate grooming and hyperthyroidism 
(Medleau and Hnilica, 2006 ). It is common in dogs and 
rare in cats. Most cases occur in the summer and fall. Most 
lesions were found on the trunk base of the tail and anal 
glands, side thighs, neck and face. Clinically, a localized 
moist lesion is surrounded by a patch of erythema ( Fig. 1). 
If the central lesion is surrounded by papules or pustules, it 
is called a satellite lesion. Dermatitis is not limited to the 
surface and may be superficial or deep pyoderma (Thomas, 
2004a). Differential diagnoses may include demodicosis, 
dermatitis, cell carcinoma including mastocytoma, seba -
ceous adenocarcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma squamous 
cell and eosinophilic granuloma. Diagnosis: History of the 
presence of ear infection, or flea infestation. Important 
clinical signs include the presence of satellite lesions which 
suggests a deeper infectious process, requiring more ag -
gressive antibiotic treatment. Skin scraping and cytology—
show degraded neutrophils and often a mixture of bacteria 
(Hill et al., 1995).
Intertrigo complex (pyodermal dermatitis): The Intertrigo 
complex occurs when the skin folds are invaded by any 
disease-causing organisms. Other contributing factors are 
maceration of the skin due to over-grooming, stained with 
tears or urine. Although bacterial involvement is common, 
Intertrigo can occur due to a combined infection of bacteria 
with yeast and or surface Demodex. Various anatomical po-
sitions provide different microenvironments to enable organ-
isms to combine to reproduce and cause disease. These are 
usually the following: Bacteria— Staphylococcus interme-
dius, Pseudomonas spp., Yeast—Malassezia  pachydermatis, 
Malassezia honyodialis, Parasite—Demodex canis, Demodex  
gatoi (DeBoer, 1995).
Various forms of Intertrigo may be seen in lip folds, fa-
cial folds, vaginal folds, tail folds, labial folds, the crease 
between the digits, and folds in the scrotum. Diagnosis can 
be made by cytology of direct smear or acetate tape stained 
with DiffQuik to evaluate the type of bacteria and yeast. 
A skin scraping can be done to check for parasitic infection. 
Treatment may include cleaning of the affected area with 
broad spectrum topical applications and shampoo based on 
the etiological agents. If necessary, the underlying disease 
should be treated, e.g., reducing weight loss for obese ani -
mals, castration for reducing scrotal folds, dental treatment 
of gingivitis and allergy therapy (Hill et al., 1995).
Superficial infection (superficial pyoderma): Superficial 
infection is seen affecting the outermost surface of the skin 
and the intact hair follicle. The condition does not extend be-
yond the epidermis. Superficial pyoderma can be classified 
as: impetigo, folliculitis, dermatitis pyoderma, methicillin-  
resistant Staphylococcus aureus  and dry skin disease. 
Impetigo: is caused by Staphylococcus as secondary bacte-
rial infection associated with viral or bacterial diseases, poor 
hygiene and ectoparasitic infestation. Clinically noncystic 
pustules with or without itching, which may rupture, and 
form crust. Impetigo are found on the hairless area of the ab-
domen. Rupture and ulceration of these papules result in the 
loss of considerable amount of the epidermis ( Hall, 2004). 
Treatment can be done by application of antibacterial sham-
poo and solution containing benzoyl peroxides, chlorhexi -
dine for three times a week. Antibiotic ointment containing 
fusidic acid may be helpful in healing the ulcerated papules.
Mucocutaneous pyoderma: It is a bacterial infection 
found in German Shepherds due to Staphylococcus spp. 
The affected animal may present swollen, reddish areas 
with ulceration and encrustation at the mucocutaneous 
junction ( Fig.  2), at the margin of the eyelids and at the 
commissures of the urogenital junctions. Diagnosis can be 
made by clinical appearance, skin scrappings, cytological

258 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
examination and histopathology which may show hyper -
plastic growth of the epidermal layer, presence of pustules 
and desquamation of the epidermal layer (Hill et al., 1995). 
Treatment includes a thorough cleaning of the affected area 
with antibacterial wipes and application of topical prepara-
tions containing fusidic acid followed by systemic adminis-
tration of antibiotics.
Bacterial folliculitis: This condition is characterized by 
the formation of follicular pustules of the intact hair folli -
cles, caused by Staphylococcus intermedius and S. schleiferi 
and MRSA. Introduction of the causative organism in the 
body may occur due to parasitic infestation, an endocrine 
disorder, allergy, immunosuppression, faulty grooming and 
self-inflicting trauma ( Bloom, 2004 ). Clinically animals 
may show alopecia with scaling and pruritus. Epidermal col-
larettes may be evident with crust formation. Diagnosis can 
be made from skin scrappings, fungal examination and cy -
tological examination. Histopathology may present follicu-
litis, perifolliculitis and interfollicular superficial dermatitis. 
Treatment may include both topical and systemic antibiotics 
based on the type of bacterial infection (Thomas, 2004a).
Deep bacteria infection/deep pyoderma: This condition 
initially starts from the epidermis and dermis and may also 
extend to the subcutaneous tissue ( Fig.  3). Foreign body 
like harnesses and belts, random wounds, self-inflicting 
trauma, abscess, demodicosis and allergy may result in 
both local deep pyoderma or generalized deep pyoderma 
(DeBoer, 1995). Deep pyoderma may be seen as subcutane-
ous abscess, furunculosis, nasal folliculitis, chin pyoderma, 
pododermatitis, etc.
Subcutaneous abscesses are very common in aggressive 
felines which have a tendency to bite thus inoculating the 
bacteria present in the oral cavity in the biting wound which 
might end up forming an abscess on the face, neck, limbs 
and tail base (Medleau and Hnilica, 2006).
Furunculosis is another form of deep pyoderma where 
the infected follicles may rupture and spread the infection 
in the dermis, usually on the trunk and the areas where pres-
sure point develops. Small papules may rupture forming ul-
cerated, erythematous areas which may subsequently form 
a crust (Madleau and Hnilica, 2006).
Nasal folliculitis is most commonly found on the bridge 
of the nose which might extend to the surrounding part of 
the nose. Nasal folliculitis occurs due to the rooting habit of 
the animal or from an insect bite.
Canine acne or chin pyoderma is a form of furunculosis 
of the chin and lips in canines. This condition is charac -
terized by nonpainful, nonpruritic areas which might show 
severe serosanguineous discharge. Young puppies are more 
susceptible to trauma from continuous friction from toys 
or hard floors, allergies and hormonal imbalance ( Medleau 
and Hnilica, 2006).
FIG. 1 Superficial infection. (Contributed by Dr. Sherif Uddin Ahmed).
FIG. 2 Mucocutaneous pyoderma.
 FIG. 3 Deep pyoderma. (Contributed by Dr. Sushanta Gswami).

Diseases of integument system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 17  259
Pododermatitis/interdigital pyoderma is another form 
of folliculitis which affects the interdigital spaces. Etiology 
may include a number of factors like fungal infection com-
bined with dermatophytosis, neoplasm, ectoparasites, or 
trauma. Pustules of various shapes and sizes may be present 
in the interdigital space, which might later become purulent 
or ulcerated, with serosanguineous exudation. The animal 
may show lameness depending upon the extent of the lesion 
and feet affected (Hall, 2004).
Botryomycosis or bacterial pseudomycetoma: This 
condition is caused by Staphylococcus spp., Pseudomonas 
spp., Proteus spp. and Streptococcus spp. which forms 
granuloma in the affected area. These causative organisms 
find their way into the deeper tissue by way of punctured 
or penetrating wounds, biting injuries and foreign body re -
action (Thomas, 2004a). Lesions are characterized by the 
formation of granuloma which is neither painful nor pru -
ritic containing colonies of bacteria that appear as purulent 
white color grains. Diagnosis can be made by the presence 
of bacterial colonies in the granuloma.
Mycobacterial infection: It is caused by Mycobacterium 
tuberculosis, M. bovis and M. tuberculosis-bovis. Infection 
occurs from contaminated milk and meat. Clinically af -
fected animals may show nodules on the skin of the head, 
neck and limb region ( Fig. 4 and 5 ) which may, later on, 
transform into an abscess or ulcerate discharging green or 
yellow content. The animal may show progressive weight 
loss, difficulty in breathing, gastrointestinal disorder and 
dyspnea along with pyrexia and swollen lymph nodes 
(Bloom, 2004). Diagnosis can be made by demonstration 
of acid-fast organisms in the biopsy material collected from 
the nodules or ulcers by staining with Ziehl-Neelsen stain, 
X-rays, bacterial culture and sensitivity test.
Feline leprosy syndrome: It is caused by Mycobacterium 
lepraemurium which affects the younger population of cats. 
This condition is characterized by single or multiple nod -
ules with a characteristic nonhealing fistula. These nodules 
painless, nonulcerating nodules are usually found distrib -
uted over the head and limbs only. Apart from the history 
and clinical signs, diagnosis can be made by demonstration 
of both intra- or extracellular acid-fast bacilli and cytologi-
cal study of the aspirate made from the nodule revealing 
caseous necrosis and panniculitis (Bloom, 2004). Treatment 
can be made by complete removal of cutaneous nodules. In 
patients where surgery is not an option, long-term antibiotic 
therapy of Clofazimine should be incorporated.
Actinomycosis: This condition is caused by Actinomyces 
spp., which is a commensal organism of the oral cavity and 
gut. The bacteria gain entry through wounds or tear in the 
soft tissue and forms painful abscess which contains yel -
low color granules in the visceral organs and as well as 
the skin. Diagnosis can be made by demonstration of the 
Gram-positive beaded filamentous organism when stained 
by Gram stain (Medleau and Hnilica, 2006).
Actinobacillosis: This is caused by Actinobacillus lig-
nieresii, which gets an entry into the soft tissue of the mouth 
by injury in the face and oral cavity. Clinically numerous 
painful abscess in the mouth and neck, which contains 
thick greenish white exudate with yellow sulfur granules. 
Diagnosis can be made by demonstration of Gram-negative 
bacteria. Cytology of the abscess content may reveal the 
presence of sulfur granules while histopathology may 
FIG. 4 Mycobacterium infection on the face. (Contributed by Dr. Jove 
Jacob).
FIG. 5 Mycobacterium infection on limbs. (Contributed by Dr. Jove Jacob).

260 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
suggest paniculitis. Treatment of this condition includes 
surgical drainage of the abscess with Sodium iodide and 
broad-spectrum antibiotic (Medleau and Hnilica, 2006).
Nocardiosis: It is caused by Nocardia asteroides and N. 
brasiliensis. The organism gets entry into the body through 
ingestion, inhalation and wound injury. Clinically there is 
inflammation of the subcutaneous tissue with the formation 
of a fistula. Lesions of nocardiosis are present in the ven -
tral part of the abdomen, limbs and foot pad. Diagnosis can 
be made based on the presence of Gram-positive acid-fast 
organism which appears as Chinese letters. Treatment con-
sists of cleaning of the lesion with antibiotic solution and 
administration of a combined antibiotic regime including 
ampicillin, sulfonamides, or cephalosporin ( Madleau and 
Hnilica, 2006).
Bubonic plague: This condition is caused by Yersinia 
pestis. The organism enters the body by ingestion of in -
fected rodents or by flea bites. Clinically Bubonic plague 
is characterized by abscess of lymph node, rise in tempera-
ture, septicemia and sometimes pneumonia. Diagnosis is 
made by history and clinical signs. The presence of Gram-
negative bipolar organisms in the affected lymph node is 
helpful. Confirmation of Yersinia organism by molecular 
techniques. Treatment is made by flushing the abscess with 
chlorhexidine solution followed by a long-term antibiotic 
course for at least 3 weeks (Toboada, 2000).
Aspergillosis: This condition is caused by Aspergillus 
fumigatus. The organism has special affinity toward the re-
spiratory system and the skin. Clinically, the condition is 
characterized by, mucosal nodules and mucohemorrhagic 
nasal discharge, accompanied by desquamation of nasal 
mucosa and epistaxis ( Madleau and Hnilica, 2006 ). Along 
with these, the organism also forms cutaneous nodules. 
Diagnosis can be made from the contents of the nodules, 
which may show presence of septate branching hyphae. 
Treatment with Fluconazole, Ketoconazole and Itraconazole 
proves to be effective (Campbell, 2004).
Blastomycosis: It is caused by Blastomyces dermatitidis. 
The organism gets entry into the body by inhalation of spore 
and causes systemic blastomycosis. Clinically, blastomyco-
sis can result in respiratory distress, eye problems like de -
tachment of the retina, inflammation of uvea and nervous 
symptoms, i.e., lameness and paralysis. Numerous ulcerat -
ing purulent nodules are found on the skin, face, claw and 
bridge of the nose. Diagnosis can be made by the demonstra-
tion of broad-based yeast with a double cell wall (Moriello, 
2004). Cytology of the nodules may reveal double-walled 
budding fungi with pyogranulomatous dermatitis. Treatment 
may include long-term antifungal drugs like fluconazole and 
amphotericin-B till the clinical signs subside.
Candidiasis: This condition is caused by Candida al -
bicans, Candida parapsilosis , which gains entry into 
the system through traumatized or injured skin surface 
and mucocutaneous junctions. Clinically, foul-smelling, 
 shallow, wet ulcerated areas covered with fibrinous de -
posits with an inflammatory zone are present. Diagnosis is 
made by demonstration of yeast from the exudates (Fig. 6). 
Histopathology may reveal hyperkeratosis and parakerato -
sis with the presence of yeast on the skin (Matousek, 2004). 
Treatment can be done by topical application of antifungal 
preparation or systemic administration of Ketoconazole, 
Itraconazole or Fluconazole.
Coccidiomycosis: It is caused by Coccidioides im -
mitis. The organism enters into the body by inhalation of 
the spore resulting into both cutaneous and systemic infec -
tion. Clinically the cutaneous form is presented with for -
mation of abscess distributed over the body surface, while 
the systemic disease is characterized by high rise of tem -
perature, difficulty in locomotion as the organism affects 
the bones. Moreover, there might be ocular problems like 
uveitis, blindness, etc. ( Moriello, 2004). Diagnosis can be 
made by demonstration of the endospore with double wall, 
along with evidence of pyogranuloma in the smear prepared 
from the cutaneous nodules ( Scott et  al., 2001 ). Advance 
molecular techniques including ELISA, PCR, complement 
fixation test, agglutination test can help in confirming the 
organism. Treatment includes a long-term antifungal course 
of Fluconazole, Itraconazole and Ketoconazole.
Cryptococcosis: This condition is caused by 
Cryptococcus neoformans . Organism gains entry into the 
body by inhalation of spore and is most commonly seen in 
animals which have direct or indirect contact with pigeon 
droppings. At the early phase of the infection, the organism 
affects the nasal sinuses, nasal cavity and the lungs where 
the organism continues to proliferate and spreads to the 
brain, eyes and lymph node. Clinically ulcerated granuloma 
is most commonly seen on the nose. Respiratory problems 
like mucopurulent nasal discharge, wheezing can be seen 
in animals. When the brain is affected the animal presents 
ocular disturbances, walking and coordination problem. 
Lymphadenopathy and cutaneous lesions are common 
on interdigital spaces, lips, nose and face ( Medleau and 
Hnilica, 2006). Diagnosis can be done by the history of ani-
mal residing or coming in contact with pigeon droppings. 
FIG. 6 Candida organism.

Diseases of integument system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 17  261
Biopsy of cutaneous nodules may present thin walled yeast 
with a clear refractile capsule ( Fig. 7). PCR, latex agglu -
tination test and ELISA can be helpful in the detection 
of the organism. Treatment includes surgical removal of 
the cutaneous nodules along with a long-term antifungal 
course of Itraconazole, Fluconazole, Amphotericin-B and 
Ketoconazole.
Dermatophytosis: This is a common condition in ca -
nines and felines affecting the stratum corneum and hair 
shaft caused by Microsporum canis , M. gypsum  and 
Trichophyton mentagrophytes . The affected animal pres -
ents exfoliative erythematous dermal lesion, seborrheic 
dermatitis lesion on the foot pad, scaling and crusting of 
the periocular region (Fig. 8) and different grades of alope-
cia with hyperpigmentation ( Madleau and Hnilica, 2006 ). 
Some animals may show circular areas of alopecia accom -
panied by scaling on the pinna which appears as “Cigarette 
ash.” Diagnosis can be made by examination of the hair 
shaft which emits apple green fluorescence when exam -
ined under Wood’s lamp (Thomas, 2004b). Demonstration 
of arthrospores in 10% Potassium hydroxide and fungal 
culture in Sabouraud’s dextrose agar using the Mackenzie 
method is useful in diagnosis. Histopathology of affected 
tissue reveals furunculosis, parakeratosis, orthokerato -
sis and perifolliculitis. Treatment includes bathing the 
animal with antifungal shampoo twice weekly. For se -
vere infection, systemic therapy should be started for at 
least 5–6 weeks and should be continued till two negative 
cultures.
Histoplasmosis: This condition is caused by Histoplasma 
capsulatum. The organism enters into the body by the inges-
tion and inhalation of the spores and affects the central ner-
vous system, skin, lymph nodes and eyes ( Mueller, 2004). 
Clinically the animal exhibits gastrointestinal disturbances, 
respiratory distress, fever, inappetency, defective vision 
and presence of ulcerated nodules on the body. Diagnosis 
is based on the presence of yeast with a halo around them 
(Fig. 9). Histology of the lesion shows dermatitis with in -
filtration of neutrophils with the intracellular organism. 
Treatment with fluconazole, amphotericin-B and itracon -
azole for a minimum of 4 months.
Lagenidiosis: It is caused by Lagenidium species. These 
organisms are a type of water molds that causes fungal in -
fection of the skin in animals that come in contact with such 
infected water. Clinically, the disease is characterized by an 
erythematous, localized area that may have nodules with 
hemorrhagic mucopurulent content. Diagnosis can be made 
by history of recent exposure to water bodies and the pres -
ence of granuloma on the body ( Moriello, 2004 ). Biopsy 
material may show the presence of branching hyphae with 
panniculitis, dermatitis, and infiltration of neutrophil, eo -
sinophil and giant cells. Immunomolecular technique like 
Western immunoblot and PCR is helpful to confirm the or-
ganism (Medleau and Hnilica, 2006 ). If the extremities of 
the limb have been affected severely, then amputation may 
be the only choice of treatment.
Malasseziosis: This is caused by Malassezia pachyder-
matis, M. globosa, M. sympodialis. The condition is char -
acterized by erythematous overgrowth of the epidermis, 
FIG. 7 Cryptococcus organism.
FIG. 8 Periocular lesion due to dermatophytosis. (Contributed by Dr. 
Sushanta Goswami).
 FIG. 9 Histoplasma organism.

262 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
especially on the skin foldings and the pinna of the ear, 
neck, interdigital spaces, medial aspect of the thigh (Fig. 10A 
and B), axillae and abdomen (Thomas, 2004a). The affected 
area may show greasy seborrheic dermatitis and foul-  
smelling papules. Diagnosis can be made by the demon -
stration of the purple staining peanut-shaped fungi stained 
with Diff-Quik. Presence of lymphohistiocytic dermatitis 
with the presence of fungi in the biopsy material. Treatment 
with medicated shampoo containing Ketoconazole, 
Chlorhexidine, Miconazole, Selenium sulfide, or topical 
applications made from lime sulfur or Enilconazole may 
be effective (Scott et al., 2001 ). However, in severe cases, 
systemic administration of Itraconazole, Ketoconazole and 
Terbinafine is effective.
Pythiosis: It is caused by Pythium insidiosum which is 
an aquatic protozoan found in swampy and marshy areas. 
This condition is characterized by formation of numerous 
subcutaneous nodules which might rupture and may be cov-
ered with plaques. These ulcerating nodules are commonly 
seen on the inguinal area, feet, head and tail. Diagnosis can 
be made by history of exposure to swampy areas. Biopsy 
of the granuloma may show eosinophilic inflammation 
with dermatitis (Mueller, 2004). As detection of the fungal 
hyphae is difficult in the biopsy so molecular diagnostic 
technique, i.e., PCR, and ELISA is applied to identify the 
antigen. Treatment may include amputation of the limbs as 
antifungal drugs do not give good results.
Pseudomycetoma: It is caused by M. canis and T. men-
tagrophytes. This condition is characterized by purulent, 
nonpruritic, nonpainful nodules in the deeper layer of 
skin invading the dermis and subcutaneous tissue distrib -
uted on the body and tail ( Greene and Chandler, 1998 ). 
Diagnosis can be made by demonstration of fungus in the 
pyogranulomatous exudate. Cytology of nodular smear 
may present panniculitis and inflammation of the dermal 
layer with the presence of septate hyphae or pseudohyphae. 
Treatment includes complete removal of the nodules along 
with the administration of Itraconazole, Ketoconazole and 
Griseofulvin.
Sporotrichosis: This is caused by Sporothrix schenckii. 
Organism gains entry into the body either through penetrat-
ing wounds. These lesions are characterized by nonpainful, 
nonpruritic, nodules which are found distributed all over 
the body. The nodules are purulent in nature which might 
later discharge their content and get covered with plaque. 
Clinically Sporotrichosis is found in cutaneous form or 
cutaneolymphatic form. Diagnosis can be made by dem -
onstration of intra- or extracellular oval cigar-shaped uni -
cellular fungi in the smear made from the purulent nodules 
(Thomas, 2004a). Cytology of the nodule may reveal gran-
ulomatous dermatitis with increased infiltration of neutro -
phils. An immunofluorescent test and culture of the exudate 
may help in giving a confirmatory diagnosis ( Carlotti and 
Jacobs, 2000). Treatment can be done by Ketoconazole or 
Itraconazole.
Neosporosis: This condition is caused by Neospora 
caninum. Transplacental infection is the common mode 
of transmission. This condition is characterized by neuro -
muscular disorder. Clinically young animals may present 
lameness, paralysis, meningitis and encephalitis. While the 
older dogs present the cutaneous form of the disease with 
numerous, solid, fistulous nodules with ulceration on the 
face, neck, thorax, and perineum. Diagnosis can be made 
by demonstration of oval intracellular tachyzoites in the 
macrophages and keratinocytes collected from the nodular 
content (Curtis, 2004). Treatment can be done by antibiotics 
like Clindamycin and Trimethoprim-Sulfadiazine.
Leishmaniasis: It is caused by Leishmaniasis species. 
Organism enters into the body by blood-sucking flies be -
longing to Phlebotomus spp. Leishmaniasis is presented in 
Visceral and Cutaneous forms. The Visceral form shows 
inappetency, emaciation, pyrexia, conjunctivitis and hepa -
tosplenomegaly. While the cutaneous form is character -
ized by erythematous pustules on the skin and ulcerative 
dermatitis at the mucocutaneous junction, hyperkeratosis, 
periocular scaling and alopecia ( Madleau and Hnilica, 
2006). Cutaneous lesion is found distributed all over the 
body. Diagnosis can be by the demonstration of Leishmania 
amastigotes inside the macrophages ( Fig.  11). Molecular 
technique like ELISA, immunofluorescent technique, im -
munohistochemistry and PCR is useful in confirming the 
FIG. 10  (A) Malasseziosis in the neck region. (B) Malassezia 
 infection on limbs. Panel (A) (Contributed by Dr. Sushanta Goswami). 
Panel (B) (Contributed by Dr. Sushanta Goswami).

Diseases of integument system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 17  263
organism ( Scott et  al., 2001 ). Histopathology may show 
parakeratosis, hyperkeratosis, perifolliculitis and round-
shaped, blue-colored Leishmania organism in the mac -
rophages. As Leishmaniasis does not have a cure, so the 
patient is given symptomatic treatment.
Otodectes infection: This infection is caused by mite 
named Otodectes cynotis. The mite lives on the skin surface 
of ears. Animals with this condition shows ear infection 
with increased waxy secretion from the ear canal, which 
appears as dirty brown accumulation in the ear and hence 
called “coffee ground” appearance. Secondary bacterial in-
fection is common with purulent exudate in the ear canal. 
Due to irritation in the ear canal and skin adjacent to the 
ear and face, self-inflicting injury and aural hematomas are 
very common. Diagnosis can be made by the presence of 
white flaky objects moving on the skin surface by the naked 
eye, or in the ear wax or superficial skin scrappings (Kennis, 
2004). Treatment can be done by cleaning the ear canal 
with antibiotic solution and application of medicated solu -
tion containing 10% fipronil solution. Animal with heavy 
mite infestation can be given spot on preparation containing 
Moxidectin, Selamectin or Ivermectin (Moriello, 2004).
Demodicosis: It is caused by D. canis , D. cornei  and 
D. ingai. Close contact with infected animal may transmit 
the infection. Demodicosis can result into immunosuppres-
sion by lowering T-lymphocytes. Demodicosis in found 
in cutaneous form, pododemodicosis form and demodec -
tic otitis form. Cutaneous demodicosis is characterized by 
erythematous lesion with scaling, alopecia and pruritus 
(Fig. 12). This form is commonly found in the periocular 
region. Pododemodicosis affects the footpad, interdigital 
space and appear edematous, erythematous, pyogenic le -
sion with intense pain and pruritus. Demodectic otitis is 
characterized by severe pruritic, erythematous lesion of 
ear with intense waxy deposits in the ear canal. Diagnosis 
can be made by demonstration of the mite in the deep skin 
scrappings and ear wax. Animals presented with seborrheic 
dermatitis should be examined for the presence of mite. 
Examination of the hair follicle and acetate tape impression 
is helpful in the identification of follicular mites (Matousek, 
2004; Bandi and Saikumar, 2013 ). Treatment can be done 
by topical solution containing lime sulfur, benzoyl peroxide 
and selenium sulfide. Amitraz can good results in patient 
with otitis and pododemodicosis.
Sarcoptic mange: Sarcoptic mange is caused by 
Sarcoptes scabiei var. canis. It is a very common infection 
of skin in dogs. However, it is not very common in cats. 
Wild foxes are considered to be the reservoir and carrier 
of this mite, which might spread in the shelter house and 
breeding house or pet animals coming in close contact. 
The mite sarcoptes has a tendency to burrow deep into the 
skin and results in the formation of papules on the body 
and limbs. Skin lesions are often seen on the hair less ar -
eas like the ventral side of abdomen, ear tips and elbows 
as papules covered with dry encrustation. Constant itchi -
ness may lead to self-inflicting injury like redness, tear of 
skin and laceration. Diagnosis can be made by demonstra -
tion of deep skin scrapings ( Bandi and Saikumar, 2013 ). 
Presence of the intact mite, mite eggs or mite feces on the 
skin, bedding material and kennels. Clinically, the affected 
area is reddish, hairless with encrustation of the skin le -
sion. Examination of biopsy material with demonstration of 
FIG. 11 Leishmaniasis.
FIG. 12 Demodicosis.

264 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 hyperplasia of the skin, inflammatory cells with huge num-
ber of eosinophils. Presence of IgG antibodies can be dem-
onstrated by performing ELISA. Treatment can be made by 
Moxidectin and Selamectin topical application on the area 
(Bandi and Saikumar, 2013). Pets can be given a bath using 
5% Amitraz and 2%–3% lime sulfur. Parenteral drugs like 
1% Moxidectin and Ivermectin along with glucocorticoids 
can be effective. All the bedding material and kennel should 
be either incinerated. Environment containing the mites can 
be sprayed with permethrin solution. This is a zoonotic con-
dition, where it leads to constant irritation and scratching.
Trombiculiasis: Trombiculiasis is caused by Neotrombicula  
autumnalis, Walchi Americana and Eutrembicula spp. 
Neotrombicula are commonly found in grassland in coun -
tries with temperate climatic condition. However, this con-
dition is not a common skin infection in canine and feline 
and is also not considered to be zoonotic. Clinically, the le-
sion of these ectoparasite is seen in those part of the body 
which may be frequently come in contact with the ground 
like the paw and ear. The area has a characteristic bright, red 
dot like appearance, which is described as Paprika appear -
ance (Fig. 13). Affected area seems to be very itchy, with 
vesicle formation, development of wheals, eruptions and 
alopecia. Diagnosis can be made by demonstration of the 
mite appears to be bright red/orange dots of about 0.6 mm in 
length under microscope. Examination of biopsy material 
may show infiltration of eosinophils, with tissue destruc -
tion and sign of dermatitis (Portillo et al., 2020; Stekolvikov 
et al., 2014 ). Treatment can be done by using glucocorti -
coids to manage the pruritus. Spraying of fipronil 0.25% 
can be used as a preventive measure.
Hard tick infection: The most common hard ticks 
which affect the dog and cats are Rhipicephalus, Ixodes, 
Hemophysalis, Amblyomma and Dermacentor. Hard tick 
can affect both the felines and canines. As the tick has a 
nature to bite and suck blood from the skin, they result in 
irritation and sometimes there might be formation of granu-
lomatous growth usually called as tick head granuloma as 
the granuloma is formed when the tick body is removed 
by grooming, the head remains embedded deep in the skin 
resulting in chronic inflammation. Moreover, ticks are the 
potent carriers of protozoan, virus, bacteria and rickettsia 
(Jose et al., 2018 ). Diagnosis can be made by the demon -
strated of the tick and clinical sign. Treatment can be made 
by application of topical ascarides like Amitraz, Fipronil 
and Permethrin. Nowadays, roll-on or spot-on preparations 
containing acaricides may be advisable. Spraying the in -
fected environment with pyrethrin is useful.
Fleas: Fleas belonging to species Ctenocephalides canis 
is known to affect canines and may cause both nonflea allergy 
or flea allergy. It is documented that the flea saliva contains 
components which might induce both immediate type of hy-
persensitivity or delayed type of hypersensitivity. Animals 
having nonflea allergy may contain fleas on their hair coat 
but might not show any severe skin lesion except for a mild 
degree of moist dermatitis ( Motameni et al., 2014 ). While 
animals with flea allergy might present moist dermatitis with 
formation of innumerable papules, with crust formation loss 
of body hair and hyperpigmentation. Majority of the lesion 
are present on the back and ventral surface of the abdomen. 
Presence of numerous minute papules is called miliary der-
matitis, with heavy infiltration of eosinophilic. Diagnosis 
can be made by presence of intact fleas and flea dirt on the 
body and hair coat. Detection of blood mixed with flea feces 
by wet paper test can be useful. Another remarkable tech -
nique to confirm the by presence of flea is to demonstrate 
the presence of segments of Dipylidium caninum spp. in fe-
ces. Biopsy may present huge number of eosinophils with 
dermatitis ( Abdullah et  al., 2019 ). The lesion comprises 
reddish papules which may later get covered with dry crust 
(Fig. 14). Treatment is only effective when the population of 
flea is controlled. Application of pesticides like cypromazine 
and permethrin in the infested environment. Topical sprays 
contain fipronil is effective. Skin lesion can be treated with 
glucocorticoid like methylprednisolone is advised. For the 
hypersensitivity, administration of histamine along with an-
tibiotic may be effective.
Myiasis: By definition, myiasis means invasion of 
the skin and subcutaneous tissue with maggots of flies. 
Dipteran flies which usually gets attracted to the foul smell 
FIG. 13 Trombiculiasis infection.

Diseases of integument system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 17  265
of urine, feces and seeping wound when the flies belonging 
to the spp. Lucila, Calliphora, Chrysomyia, Sarcophaga and 
Musca. The flies usually lay eggs on body parts which is 
associated with excretion and necrosed area. Even the flies 
may eggs near the nasal orifice, where due to the passage 
of warm expired air aids in the hatching of eggs. The larva 
gradually dissolves the nearby skin and tissue by secreting 
enzymes. Clinically, lesions can be seen in around the uro -
genital opening, nose, mouth, eyes, infected and necrosed 
wounds and anal opening. Affected area appears wet, oozy 
necrotic tissue with presence of maggots ( Ali and Hossein, 
2016). Diagnosis can be made by the demonstration of 
fly larvae in the lesions ( Fig. 15). Treatment can be made 
by removal of the larvae by administration of Ivermectin. 
Affected area should be cleaned with antibacterial solution 
containing chlorhexidine. To hasten wound healing, some -
times debridement of the dead and nearby tissue is required.
Hook worm dermatitis: Ancylostomiasis is caused by 
Ancylostoma braziliense and Ancylostoma caninum. Pet 
dogs which spends most of the time in soil or kennels with un-
hygienic and infected environment. By nature, Ancylostoma 
enter the body by penetrating through the skin. Clinically, 
small papule like eruption on the skin especially in those 
area which remains in contact with earth. These papules on 
entry size can be seen in ventral side of the abdomen, thorax 
and paw. The area with reddish papules may present alopecia 
with itching (Qadir et al., 2011). The skin over the paw may 
show hyperkeratinization. Diagnosis can be made by dem -
onstration of Ancylostoma eggs (Brahmbhatt et al., 2015) by 
fecal floatation examination (Fig. 16). Examination of biopsy 
material may present intense eosinophilic infiltration, with 
perivascular dermatitis. Treatment can be done by adminis-
tration of mebendazole, fenbendazole and pyrantel pamoate. 
Transform the damp playing area into dry area to avoid sus-
ceptibility of parasitic ova. The kennel may be treated with 
sodium borate to inhibit hatching of Ancylostoma ova (Saari 
and Nikandu, 2006).
Pelodera dermatitis: Pelodera dermatitis is caused by 
Pelodera strongyloides. This parasite is found in dead, de -
caying land where the soil is considerably moist, which 
becomes convenient for the survival and viability of the 
parasitic ova. The larvae of the parasite after hatching have 
a tendency to penetrate through the skin of the animal 
which is in close contact with the soil. Clinically red color 
eruption may be seen accompanied by loss of hair. The 
region of the body commonly affected are the paw, legs, 
perineum and ventral surface of the skin over the sternum 
and abdomen. In chronic case, itching redness of the area 
is seen as the area might be subsequently infected by lichen 
and hyperpigmentation of the skin. Diagnosis can be made 
by the erythematous eruptions on the skin. Microscopical 
deep skin scrapping may reveal the larvae of Pelodera. 
Biopsy examination may present inflammation of the skin 
with eosinophilic infiltration, inflammation of the hair fol -
licles and development of furunculosis. Treatment can be 
made by administration of prednisolone to reduce itching 
FIG. 14 Flea dermatitis.
FIG. 15 Myiasis.
 FIG. 16 Ancylostoma caninum ova in fecal smear.

266 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
and  swelling. Antibiotics may be suggested if the affected 
area has been invaded by secondary bacterial infection. 
Washing of the body coat with salicylic acid is seen to be 
effective if followed by a subsequent dip comprising of 
2% lime sulfur. Treatment of the environment is equally 
important if the repeated infection of the parasite is to be 
stopped. The kennels can be treated with sodium borate 
and incineration of the affected bedding material (Saari and 
Nikandu, 2006).
Dracunculosis: Dracunculosis is caused by Dracunculus 
spp. Pet animals get the infection by eating the intermediate 
host of the parasite, i.e., a crustacean from a contaminated 
source of water. The larvae continue to develop in the sub -
cutaneous area of the leg region, while the female parasite 
returns to the skin surface and form a granuloma, so that 
when the animal visits any water body, the female may re -
lease the larvae through rupturing the granuloma. Clinically, 
focal or multifocal subcutaneous granuloma may be seen 
on the limb, abdomen and head ( Panciera and Stockholm, 
1988). The granuloma may be having a nonhealing fistulae 
and may be either itchy or painful. Diagnosis can be made 
by the history of visiting an unknown water body with sub-
sequent development of nodules on the body. Biopsy evalu-
ation may present a pseudocyst which might contain either 
the larval stage of the parasite or the adult nematode. The 
granuloma may also contain inflammatory cells, mostly 
eosinophils, necrotic tissue, debris and pus ( Garret et  al., 
2020). Best treatment is to dry out the nearby contami -
nated water source or decontamination of the water body 
to kill the parasitic larva. Animal can be treated by manual 
removal of the parasite by rolling up the entire parasite 
on a stick and surgical removal of the nodule. Drugs like 
thiabendazole and metronidazole work quite effectively in 
these infestation.
Dirofilaria infection: Dirofilariasis is caused by 
Dirofilaria immitis or D. repens. Pet animals get infection 
through the biting of mosquito or a biting fly. The interme-
diate host injects the larvae while sucking blood. The larva 
along with the blood circulation reaches the heart, where 
the larvae grow into mature size in the right ventricle. Due 
to increase in size the growing parasite occlude the entire 
right ventricle. Clinically itchy, reddish popular area which 
may turn into encrusted nodules ( Santoro et  al., 2019 ). 
These cutaneous lesions are common on the limbs, face 
and head. Diagnosis can be made based on the history of 
increased population of flies in the environment and pres -
ence of ulcerated nodules. Microscopical examination of 
the blood smear may demonstrate microfilaria. Knott’s test 
can be performed to demonstrate the microfilaria in blood 
(Fig. 17). Examination of biopsy material may demonstrate 
segments of microfilaria, huge number of eosinophils, sign 
of necrosis and pus ( Genchi et al., 2005 ). Treatment using 
melarsomine dihydrochloride and sodium thiacetarsamide 
seems to be effective.
Solar dermatitis: Pet animals like canine and felines who 
has a defective pigmentation in skin may show photosensi-
tivity. The animals may show various degree of sunburn due 
to the action of the harmful ultraviolet light, which might 
result into squamous cell carcinoma, carcinoma in situ and 
actinic keratoses. Clinically, older cats and dogs which are 
more to such skin condition. Animals which tends to play 
under the sun. Solar dermatitis can be seen to develop on the 
pinna of ear, eyelids, lips, nose and trunk. The affected area 
often show alopecia with ulceration, exudation and encrus-
tation. Diagnosis can be made based on the history of exces-
sive exposure to the sun. Biopsy examination may present 
hyperplasia of the epidermis and perivascular dermatitis. 
Keratinocytes may show presence of vacuolated epidermal 
cells and basophilic degeneration of elastin and dysplasia 
of the keratinocytes. In-situ carcinoma, the neoplastic cells 
may show hyperplasia and dysplasia which do not cross the 
basement membrane zone. Treatment can be done by us -
ing a sunscreen containing zinc oxide. Animals with severe 
skin reaction can be advised to use systemic prednisolone. 
Parenteral administration of Vitamin A and Beta-carotene is 
advised. In case of secondary bacterial infection, a course 
of antibiotic can be advised. However, it is best to avoid the 
sun exposure during day time.
Frost bite: Animals may suffer from frost bite due to 
prolonged exposure to freezing temperature or due to close 
contact with ice or freezing items. Normally the extremi -
ties of the body like toes, tip of the tail and tip of the pinna 
are affected. The affected part appears painful erythematous 
with dry necrosis and ulceration. Diagnosis can be made 
based on the history of exposure to freezing temperature 
for prolonged period and development of dry gangrene 
(Matousek, 2004). Treatment is made by surgical removal 
of the gangrenous part and advising appropriate antibiotics.
Callus: Callus is a skin condition which is characterized 
by thickening of the surface of skin due to prolonged ap -
plication of pressure by bony prominences which may re -
sult into obstruction of local blood supply and subsequent 
development of inflammation. Large breed dog which lives 
FIG. 17 Dirofilaria immitis larvae in blood smear.

Diseases of integument system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 17  267
or spends most of the time on hard surface like concrete 
and wood. Calluses are very common found on the bony 
prominences over the hock, sternum and elbows ( Fig. 18). 
These hyperkeratotic calluses are neither itchy or painful. 
Diagnosis can be made by the history and clinical signs. 
Examination of biopsy material may show hyperplasia, hy-
perkeratosis, parakeratosis, dilatations of the follicles and 
follicular keratosis ( Nishitani et al., 2017 ). Treatment can 
be made by altering the pets living environment by chang -
ing the hard budding surface to soft material.
Hygroma: Hygroma is a pathological condition charac -
terized by a cyst like growth over the area of bony promi -
nence on the skin. Clinically a swollen area with fluctuating 
fluid over the skin subjected to prolong pressure by the 
bony prominences. They are found over the elbows hock 
(Fig. 19) and sternum ( Johnston, 1975). Hygroma may be 
infected bacteria resulting into development of abscess with 
formation of fistula and also may transform into granulation 
tissue. Diagnosis can be made by the history and clinical 
signs. Cytological evaluation may show presence of hem -
orrhagic exudates without much inflammation. In hygroma 
with secondary bacterial infection may contain puss and in-
flammatory cells. Biopsy examination may demonstrate the 
presence of cyst like structure in the granuloma ( Angelou 
et  al., 2020 ). Treatment can be made by administration 
of a course of antibiotic in pyogranulomatous hygroma. 
Provision of soft bedding material can prevent the repeated 
trauma by the by the bony prominences on the skin.
Neoplastic condition:
Mast cell tumor: Of all the skin cancer, Mast cell tumor 
is considered to be one of the most common skin neoplastic 
condition in pet animals. Clinically, mast cell tumor is found 
in old animals, approximately about 8 years of age. As mast 
cell tumor is malignant in nature so they appear in various 
size and shape, which may be firm and soft (Midsorp, 2004). 
They might be either distinctly circumscribed or may be 
poorly demarcated with the adjacent tissue. Affected area 
may appear as a subcutaneous edematous, nodular or pap -
ule like or pedunculated growth on the skin. The size of the 
tumor may vary from a few millimeter to a few centimeter. 
The affected area may be alopecic or ulcerated with highly 
active vasculature. Most of the cancer growth is found in 
the head and face of cats, while in dogs, it might be pres -
ent in the paw, ventral side of the thorax, abdomen, back 
and in the inguinal region ( Kiupel et al., 2005 ). Diagnosis 
can be made from the biopsy material by demonstration of 
innumerable sheets of cells or tightly packed cords of cells 
which have huge amount of cytoplasm, distinct nuclei and 
bluish colored granules all over the cytoplasm (Fig. 20) and 
presence of intense infiltration of eosinophils (Weisse et al., 
2002). Treatment for grade I, focal tumors are removed sur-
gically along with excision of surrounding normal tissue of 
about 3 cm is advised. In case of diffused tumors, where sur-
gery is not fruitful, chemotherapy consisting of vinblastine, 
cyclophosphamide and prednisolone can be given. Other al-
ternative techniques including cryosurgery, electrosurgery 
and radiotherapy are also advised. Injecting deionized water 
or triamcinolone is yet another method of treatment.
Plasmacytoma: Plasmacytoma is a type of cancer which 
consists of plasma cells which may vary from few millime-
ter to a few centimeter, found on the body, paw, face and 
pinna. Plasma cells are derived from B lymphocytes which 
originates from the common lymphoid progenitor ( Ozkan 
FIG. 18 Callus.
FIG. 19 Hygroma.
 FIG. 20 Mast cell tumor.

268 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
et  al., 2014). These types of cancer are very common in 
aged animals, especially seen growing focally and singly 
with either a firm or soft consistency. The cancer may be 
pedunculated or ulcerated in appearance. Diagnosis can be 
made by examination of biopsy material collected from the 
affected area, with demonstration of clock faced nucleus 
distribution in the neoplastic cells, which is characteristic 
of plasmacytoma (Fig. 21). The condition can be confirmed 
by the presence of round cells which contain perinuclear 
halo and presence of mitotic body with pleomorphism. 
Treatment can be made by complete removal of the can -
cerous part. Plasmacytoma shows very low metastasis, so 
it is considered that once the cancer is removed it do not 
reoccurs. In felines, spread of cancer may be seen in to the 
lymph nodes (Rakich et al., 1989).
Transmissible venereal tumor: Transmissible venereal 
tumor is a malignant type of cancer of size up to 20  cm, 
which affects the external genitalia and sometimes the 
Internal genitalia. It is also called as Sticker’s tumor and ca-
nine transmissible venereal tumor. The cancer occurs due to 
close contact during coitus from one animal to another. But 
it has been documented that close contact with the tumor 
cell during grooming can also result into transmissible ve -
nereal tumor ( Milo and Smead, 2014 ). Clinically, reddish, 
irregular, pedunculated, hemorrhagic nodules may be seen 
on the external genitalia, face or sometimes on the limb. 
These nodules may grow either single or in a bunch of mul-
tiple nodule which may be firm or friable. Diagnosis can be 
made by history and clinical signs. Cytological examination 
of biopsy material may present numerous sheets of round 
cells which have abundant collagen stroma with numer -
ous mitotic body. Presence of blue cytoplasm with vacu -
oles ( Fig.  22) is another characteristic feature to confirm 
the condition (Varghese et al., 2012). Treatment is made by 
administration of chemotherapy. Drugs like vincristine and 
doxorubicin are found to be effective in transmissible vene-
real tumor. Surgical removal of the cancerous growth may 
also be advised. Radiotherapy may also be advised as the 
carcass cells are sensitive to radiation.
Epitheliotropic lymphoma: It is a type of cancer which 
consist of T-lymphocyte in dog and cat. The condition is 
seen in four clinical forms, i.e., exfoliative erythroderma, 
mucocutaneous ulceration ( Fig.  23), solitary or multiple 
nodules (Fig. 24) and plaque and infiltrative and ulcerative 
oral disease. Animals of about 9  years of age are mostly 
FIG. 21 Plasmacytoma.
FIG. 22 Transmissible venereal granuloma.
FIG. 23 Erythematous ulceration due to epitheliotropic lymphoma.
FIG. 24 Epitheliotropic lymphoma showing erythematous nodules and 
plaques on the ventral surface of abdomen.

Diseases of integument system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 17  269
 affected. Clinically, reddish plaques and nodules are seen 
on the abdomen. Mucocutaneous ulceration can be seen on 
the junction of gums and lips (Moore et al., 1994; Doe et al., 
1988). Diagnosis can be made by history and clinical signs 
examination of biopsy material collected from plaques or 
ulcers may reveal round neoplastic lymphoid cells with blu-
ish cytoplasm with lobular or indented nuclei. Examination 
of biopsy material may show infiltration of neoplastic lym-
phocyte into the dermis layer, follicles and sweat gland 
epithelium. Pautrier’s microabscess, i.e., aggregation of few 
neoplastic cells at multifocal local in the epidermal layer 
are pathognomonic. Treatment can be made by surgical re-
moval of single focal cancerous area. Whereas the multiple 
cancerous area are treated by chemotherapy consisting of 
vincristine, cyclophosphamide, prednisolone and metho -
trexate. Application of topical preparation is consistent of 
nitrogen mustard or propylene glycol.
Melanocytoma/melanoma: Melanoma or melanocytoma 
is defined as the intense proliferation of the melanocytes 
which may get transformed either into benign or malignant. 
Clinically these type of cancer occurs in aged dogs of about 
9 years of age. Melanocytoma normally occurs as single, well-
demarcated, alopecic, raised dark-colored wart-like or pedun-
culated growth of about 0.5–10.0 cm in diameter ( Fig.  25). 
These cancers are formed on the eyelid, muzzle, face, paws 
and body surface, melanoma appears as nonpigmented, dark-
colored, single which may vary in shape and grows up to 10 cm 
in diameter. Similar to melanocytoma, melanomas are found 
in scrotum, body coat, face, head, lip and digits. Diagnosis 
can be made by examination of biopsy material, which may 
demonstrate cells of various shape, i.e., oval, round, spindle 
or stellate cell containing considerable amount of cytoplasm 
containing black or green pigment. Neoplastic cells in mela-
noma appear pleomorphic with presence of pigments inside. 
Histopathology of tissue may show hyperplastic cells which 
may appear round, epithelial or spindle-shaped cells with vari-
ous degrees of pigmentation (Gillard et al., 2014). Treatment 
may be made by surgery with drugs like cisplatin, mitoxan-
trone, doxorubicin. Other than this, radiotherapy, photody -
namic therapy may also be suggested.
Squamous cell carcinoma: The older dogs and cats are 
affected by squamous cell carcinoma. Most of the squa -
mous cell carcinoma are found on the skin, paw and nail 
bed are reported to be the secondary cancerous lesion which 
has been metastasized from the lung. Due to cancer on leg, 
paw or nail bed, the affected animal may show lameness, 
without any pulmonary lesions or clinical signs. Diagnosis 
can be confirmed by the clinical signs, history and biopsy. 
Examination of biopsy material may reveal neoplastic cells 
with abundant eosinophilic cytoplasm and prominent nu -
cleus and nuclei. The neoplastic cells usually show atypical 
mitotic bodies and the characteristic laminated epithelial 
pearl ( Fig.  26) or cell nest ( Willcox et  al., 2019). As the 
prognosis is not good so treatment is usually not advised.

270 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

271

Chapter 18
Gastrointestinal disorders of dogs and cats
1 Esophageal disorders
Esophageal diseases show a limited amount of clinical signs 
and are easily misdiagnosed. The main symptom is regurgi-
tation, which is followed by respiratory distress along with 
dysphagia, odynophagia, and salivation. Esophageal dis -
orders in the dog and cat require emergency care ( Marks, 
2017).
Other nonspecific signs include weight loss, anorexia or 
voracious appetite, unkempt coat, and depression. Physical 
examination of the oral cavity and ventral neck region can 
be done for ruling out oropharyngeal disorders, dilation, or 
mass effects in the neck part of the esophagus.
Plain and contrast radiographs may reveal esophageal 
foreign bodies, dilation, strictures, thoracic masses, hia -
tal and diaphragmatic hernia, and gastroesophageal intus -
susceptions ( Mears and Jenkins, 1997 ). Radiographs will 
help to rule out aspiration pneumonia, pleural effusions, 
and pneumothorax which are serious complications of 
esophageal diseases. The presence of air in the esophagus 
may be due to aerophagia, megaesophagus, esophagitis, or 
an esophageal obstruction. Endoscopic examination of the 
esophagus allows visualization of intraluminal disorders, 
gastroesophageal reflux, esophagitis, strictures, diverticula, 
granuloma, and neoplasia. Serum biochemistry profiling is 
needed to assess systemic complications and possible risks 
of anesthesia along with hematology.
1.1 Megaesophagus
Megaesophagus is a disorder in which by esophagus losses 
tone and motility and flaccid dilation of the esophagus 
(Johnson et  al., 2009 ). Congenital megaesophagus has 
a higher prevalence in young dogs of certain breeds such 
as miniature schnauzer, fox terrier, German shepherd dog, 
Great Dane, German pointer, Rottweiler, bobtail, and Irish 
setter. Congenital idiopathic megaesophagus is common in 
puppies when they are started on solid food at about 4 weeks 
of age. Acquired-idiopathic megaesophagus usually has no 
known underlying etiology and occurs spontaneously in 
adult dogs between 7 and 15 years of age with no sex or 
breed predilection. Acquired megaesophagus with primary 
causes includes acquired myasthenia gravis, hypothyroid -
ism, hypoadrenocorticism, neuromuscular disorders such 
as botulism, polymyositis, polyradiculoneuritis, dysautono-
mia, bilateral vagal nerve damage, brainstem disease, lead 
toxicity, and organophosphate toxicity (Fig. 1).
Regurgitation is the most frequent sign of megaesopha-
gus in animals. As with other esophageal disorders, affected 
animals suffer from loss of body condition and secondary 
aspiration pneumonia. Routine hematobiochemical and 
urinalysis should be done to rule out potential secondary 
causes of megaesophagus. Thoracic radiography and/or 
an esophagram (barium study) reveal a diffusely dilated 
esophagus throughout the cervical and thoracic esophagus 
(Fig. 2). Routine hematology, serum biochemistry, urinaly-
sis and testing for myasthenia gravis (acetylcholinesterase 
receptor antibodies), hypoadrenocorticism (ACTH stimu -
lation test), and hypothyroidism (TSH, TT4, FT4) should 
be performed in all cases to investigate possible secondary 
causes of megaesophagus. Surgical correction is effective if 
done early in this disorder.
Megaesophagus without a primary cause is treated with 
elevated feedings of either gruel or meatball consistency of 
canned food giving small amounts frequently depending on 
the individual patient response and holding the dog in an 
upright position for 15 min after each feeding. Smooth mus-
cle prokinetic (e.g., metoclopramide or cisapride) therapy 
has been recommended for stimulating esophageal peristal-
sis in affected animals, however, having less effect on the 
striated muscle of the canine esophageal body ( Washabau, 
2003). Bethanechol (5–15 mg/dog PO TID) is shown to 
have significant pro-kinetic action in the therapy of this dis-
order. Oral sucralfate suspensions (1 g TID for large dogs, 
0.5 g TID for smaller dogs, and 0.25–0.5 g BID-TID for 
cats) for managing esophagitis in idiopathic megaesopha -
gus are recommended ( Tytgat et  al., 1995). High-calorie, 
high-energy feedings should be given for the management

272 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
of malnutrition. A common complication of megaesopha -
gus is aspiration pneumonia due to frequent regurgitation of 
food and water which should be treated aggressively with 
intravenous broad-spectrum antibiotics, intravenous fluid 
therapy, nebulization, and coupage. Gastrostomy tubes can 
be placed in severe cases. Animals affected are at risk of 
aspiration pneumonia which can lead to death.
1.2 Esophagitis
Esophagitis denotes a localized or diffuse inflammation 
that may damage tissues of the esophagus. Etiology of 
esophagitis includes caustic or chemical (i.e., gastric acid, 
bile acids) injury, injury from esophageal foreign bodies, 
gastroesophageal reflux, radiation injury, idiopathic gener -
alized megaesophagus, and inflammation associated with 
malignancy. Anesthesia-induced gastroesophageal reflux 
is the most commonly reported cause in the veterinary lit -
erature. In cats, tetracyclines have the substantial potential 
to cause esophagitis ( Schulz et al., 2013 ). Esophagitis can 
cause esophageal hypomotility and thus gastroesophageal 
sphincter weakness by impairing the excitatory cholinergic 
pathways to the gastroesophageal sphincter.
Signs characteristic of esophagitis include regurgitation, 
salivation, odynophagia (inferred pain), an extension of the 
head and neck during swallowing, and avoidance of food 
(Sellon and Willard, 2003 ). Coughing may be observed in 
some animals with concurrent aspiration pneumonia.
The esophagus often appears normal on survey thoracic 
radiographs unless there is secondary dilation or aspira -
tion pneumonia. Barium contrast radiographs may reveal 
irregular mucosal surface, segmental narrowing, esopha -
geal dilation, stricture formation, and/or diffuse esophageal 
hypomotility. Endoscopy and biopsy are the most reliable 
means of diagnosing this disorder.
The treatment of esophagitis is directed at the under -
lying causes and preventing further injury by withholding 
oral food intake for 2–3 days while supporting the animal’s 
nutritional needs. Oral sucralfate suspensions at the dose 
rate of 0.5–1.0 g p.o., tid which may assist in healing of the 
FIG. 1 Classification of megaesophagus.
FIG. 2 (A) Megaesophagus plain radiography in dog revealing aerophagia in cervical esophagus and a triangular pocket of air in thoracic esophagus 
cranial to base heart. (B) Mega esophagus contrast study in a dog revealed dilated esophagus filled with barium contrast.

Gastrointestinal disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 18  273
mucosal surface are indicated in therapy for esophagitis 
(Marks et al., 2018). Antacids (e.g., calcium carbonate), H2-
blockers, and proton pump inhibitors were used to reduce 
the acidity of gastric secretions. The prokinetics metoclo -
pramide and cisapride are used to increase lower esophageal 
sphincter tone and increase gastric emptying (Wilson et al., 
2006). Cisapride is considered superior to metoclopramide. 
Oral antibiotics are required in animals with aspiration 
pneumonia or severe esophagitis. Restoration and mainte -
nance of adequate nutrition are of utmost importance. If the 
animal is willing to eat, feeding blenderized foods from an 
elevated position may be all that is needed.
1.3 Esophageal strictures
Esophageal stricture formation in dogs and cats mostly re -
sults from esophageal injury and esophagitis. Esophageal 
inflammation that extends through the mucosa into the sub-
mucosa and muscularis leads to collagen deposition and 
scarring. If the scarring is severe enough, an esophageal 
stricture develops. Other causes of esophageal stricture in -
clude congenital strictures, persistent right aortic arch, and 
extramural esophageal compression secondary to a mass. 
Approximately 80%–90% of strictures in dogs and cats are 
located in the intrathoracic esophagus, particularly between 
the heart base and gastroesophageal junction ( Adamama-
Moraitou et  al., 2002 ). Most strictures appear as focal 
circumferential narrowings formed by smooth, glistening-
white, fibrotic rings or ridges. The clinical signs of progres-
sive regurgitation and dysphagia are related to the severity 
and extent of the stricture. Animals with strictures may 
tolerate liquids better than solids. With progressive esopha-
geal narrowing and inflammation, affected animals develop 
complete anorexia, weight loss, and malnutrition. Some an-
imals also develop aspiration pneumonia. The diagnosis is 
based on clinical history and radiographic and endoscopic 
findings. Oral feedings should be withheld in cases of se -
vere stricture. Esophageal strictures are best managed with 
mechanical dilation with balloon dilatation catheters or 
bougienage tubes. Medical management includes pain med-
ication (butorphanol), omeprazole, and sucralfate similar to 
the treatment of esophagitis. Anti-inflammatory doses of 
corticosteroids (e.g., prednisone 0.5–1.0 mg/kg p.o. or i.m., 
bid) have been advocated to prevent fibrosis and restricture 
during the healing phase following esophageal dilation.
1.4 Esophageal foreign bodies
An esophageal foreign body (EFB) is any ingested item 
that fails to pass into the stomach after being swallowed. 
EFBs lodge most often at the thoracic inlet, the base of 
the heart, or the gastroesophageal sphincter, which are the 
least-distensible regions of the esophagus. The most fre -
quently reported EFBs in companion animals are bones, but 
large pieces of food, hairballs (trichobezoars), treats (dental 
chews, rawhide), and sharp objects (needles, fishhooks) can 
also become lodge. Relatively rare in cats, who are much 
more discriminatory eaters. Foreign bodies may injure the 
esophageal mucosa and cause complications such as esoph-
agitis, perforation, or stricture.
Clinical signs associated with an EFB include pain with a 
change in posture or head carriage, drooling (may or may not 
be bloody), regurgitation, repeated attempts to swallow, and 
anorexia. In severe cases, hematemesis and respiratory dis-
tress may predominate. Survey thoracic and cervical radio-
graphs are usually diagnostic for radiopaque foreign bodies 
and radiolucent objects can be identified if outlined by air, or 
they may require barium contrast radiography or esophagos-
copy (Fig.  3). Thoracic films should be reviewed carefully 
for evidence of air in the mediastinum, pleural effusion, or 
aspiration pneumonia. Free air or pleural fluid indicates per-
foration and associated mediastinitis, pleuritis, or pyothorax.
Esophageal foreign bodies should be removed promptly. 
Recently ingested food items, bones, and treats may be 
managed with relatively simple approaches, whereas a fish-
hook usually requires endoscopic or surgical removal. Items 
(particularly bone or other rigid material) that have been in 
the esophagus for prolonged periods (>24 h) may cause mu-
cosal necrosis; 1–4 these patients are probably best served 
by an endoscopic approach.
Specific therapy for esophagitis should include oral su -
cralfate suspensions (0.5–1.0 g p.o., tid). Anti-inflammatory 
doses of glucocorticoids (e.g., prednisone 0.25–0.5  mg/
kg p.o., bid) should also be considered in those animals at 
risk for esophageal stricture. An injectable proton pump 
inhibitor (e.g., pantoprazole at 0.5–1.0  mg/kg i.v. given 
over 15 min) should be administered to mitigate additional 
esophageal damage secondary to gastric reflux. Parenteral 
antibiotics are indicated for patients with aspiration pneu -
monia and/or signs of pleural effusion or pneumomedias -
tinum. Surgery is indicated if endoscopy fails or if there is 
evidence of esophageal perforation. The overall prognosis 
for dogs with an EFB is fairly good; reported survival rates 
are 75%–95%.
FIG. 3 Right lateral radiography of a dog revealed radiodense foreign 
body in cervical esophagus in a dog.

274 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
1.5 Esophageal tumors
Although very rare, esophageal neoplasia occurs occasion -
ally in dogs and cats. Squamous cell carcinomas, osteo -
sarcomas, leiomyomas ( Rolfe, 1994 ), and fibrosarcoma 
secondary to Spirocerca lupi (Fig. 4) have been reported. 
Squamous cell carcinoma is the most common feline esoph-
ageal tumor. Esophageal malignancies more commonly 
occurred in the caudal thoracic esophagus ( Ranen et  al., 
2004). Clinical signs are typically caused by mechanical 
obstruction and poor esophageal motility in the region of 
the tumor. Clinical signs of esophageal obstruction are pres-
ent and may occur progressively with the patient presenting 
with severe weight loss and malnutrition. Diagnosis is by 
thoracic radiographs, esophagram, and endoscopic biopsy 
(Willard et al., 2010 ). Surgical resection of the tumor and 
radiation therapy can be considered but overall the progno-
sis is very poor for the long term.
1.6 Gastroesophageal intussusception
Gastroesophageal intussusception (GEI) is a rare condition 
in dogs resulting from invagination of the stomach into the 
esophagus, and GEI combined with or without herniation 
of the spleen, duodenum, pancreas, and omentum (Patsikas 
et al., 2019). Young, male, medium-to-large breed dogs are 
overrepresented. In patients with the incompetence of the 
lower esophageal sphincter, vomiting during anesthesia for 
endoscopy can lead to temporary gastroesophageal intus -
susception that resolves spontaneously. Gastroesophageal 
intussusception is a true gastrointestinal emergency that 
may culminate in the death of the animal if untreated. The 
initial clinical signs are vomiting or regurgitation, dyspnea, 
hematemesis, and abdominal discomfort, and delayed in -
tervention may lead to a marked deterioration in condition, 
shock, respiratory and cardiac arrest, and death. Survey ra -
diographs and endoscopy for confirmation can be used in 
diagnosis. The recommended therapy is a brief period of 
stabilization followed by definitive endoscopic or surgical 
reduction.
1.7 Vascular ring anomalies
Vascular ring anomalies are congenital malformations of 
the major blood vessels of the body that result in esopha -
geal entrapment and constriction. The persistent right aor -
tic arch is the most common vascular ring anomaly found 
in dogs and cats. While vascular ring anomalies can arise 
from the abnormal development of the third, fourth, or 
sixth aortic arches, the most common is the persistence of 
the fourth right aortic arch (a.k.a. PRAA) which makes up 
95% of all cases in dogs and most of the cases in cats. More 
commonly affected dog and cat breeds include German 
shepherd, Irish setter, Boston terrier, German pinscher, 
Greyhound, Persian, and Siamese. Affected puppies and 
kittens are presented at a young age 2–6 months around the 
time of they are weaned from milk to solid food. Signs ob -
served include stunted animals with thin body conditions, 
voracious appetite, regurgitation, and sometimes even 
bulging of the neck in the region of the dilated esophagus. 
The diagnosis of a vascular ring anomaly is based upon a 
compatible history and the barium contrast radiographic 
finding of esophageal body dilation cranial to the base of 
the heart. They are best treated by conventional thoracot -
omy or interventional thoracoscopy. Medical management 
can be attempted through elevated feedings of a liquid diet 
as palliative but due to chronic regurgitation in affected 
animals, secondary aspiration pneumonia, and failure 
to thrive due to the inability to consume an appropriate 
amount of calories. Long-term prognosis is poor with this 
treatment option.
1.8 Dysautonomia
It is characterized by generalized and progressive dysfunc -
tion of the autonomic nervous system. Megaesophagus, 
esophageal hypomotility, and regurgitation are fairly con -
sistent findings. No definitive etiology has ever been es -
tablished. Physical examination findings consistent with 
dysautonomia include dry mucous membranes, pupillary 
dilation, prolapsed nictitating membranes, reduced or ab -
sent pupillary light reflex, bradycardia, and areflexic anus 
(Bexfield et al., 2006).
Survey or barium radiographs may reveal esophageal 
dilation and hypomotility gas-filled dilated stomach and 
bowels, reduced tear production in Schirmer tear tests, and 
atropine-insensitive bradycardia are findings consistent 
with the diagnosis.
Supportive care (e.g., artificial tears, elevated feedings, 
expressing the urinary bladder, antibiotics, etc.) is still the 
FIG. 4 Endoscopic view of nodules by Spirocera spp.

Gastrointestinal disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 18  275
basis of therapy in this disorder. Dogs and cats are reported 
to show mild improvement with parasympathomimetic 
drugs (e.g., bethanechol or metoclopramide).
2 Gastric disorders
2.1 Gastric dilatation and volvulus (GDV)
GDV is a life-threatening condition in dogs that will be 
started as fluid or gas accumulation in the stomach. If left 
untreated it will progress to volvulus and other organs are 
quickly compromised.
Etiology of this condition is unknown but numerous pre-
disposing factors (Glickman et al., 2000) are identified which 
include body conformation (deep chested large breeds, lean 
body size), diet (dry diets, once-daily feeding, eating more 
quickly, particles >30 mm in diameter have been shown 
to reduce the risk), behavioral traits (fearful temperament, 
experienced a stressful event, kenneling or a journey in the 
previous 24 h, aggression to people, stress may alter gastric 
motility or increase aerophagia), infection with nasal mites, 
colonization of the stomach with Sarcina ventriculi, and in-
flammatory bowel disease (Broome and Walsh, 2003).
The gas-filled stomach may rotate between 180 and 
360 degrees in a clockwise direction (Fig. 5). This can pro-
duce both local and systemic effects. The local effects of 
GDV are concerned with the blood supply to the gastric 
wall. Dislocation of the greater curvature of the stomach 
can cause dislocation of the spleen which may result in 
avulsion of the short gastric branches of the splenic artery 
(which lays in the gastrosplenic ligaments and supplies the 
gastric fundus). This leads to hemorrhage from the artery 
and  ischemic changes in the fundus. The pylorus and cardia 
of the stomach get obstructed due to the rotations which 
prevent gastric emptying and further expansion of the stom-
ach. This leads to increased tension in the gastric walls 
and compression of intramural blood vessels. The dilated 
stomach exerts pressure on the diaphragm, creating a de -
creased tidal volume and increased respiratory rate. Splenic 
displacement leads to venous congestion and splenomegaly. 
Avulsion of the splenic artery and thrombosis can result in 
partial or complete splenic torsion or infarction. Systemic 
effects are mainly due to obstruction of blood flow through 
the caudal vena cava and hepatic portal vein which causes 
a sudden decrease in the venous return, cardiac output, and 
hypotension. Vascular damage and poor perfusion cause 
hypoxia and tissue ischemia ( Sharp and Rozanski, 2014 ). 
Anaerobic metabolism due to hypoxia leads to the accumu-
lation of lactic acid in the circulation. Myocardial ischemia 
and cardiac arrhythmias are common findings in animals 
affected with GDV . Septic peritonitis (due to perforation 
of the gastric wall), systemic inflammatory response syn -
drome, and disseminated intravascular coagulation are the 
complication of GDV ( Uhrikova et al., 2013 ). Progressive 
distension of the abdomen, retching, unproductive vomit -
ing, and hypersalivation are the main presenting symptoms 
in the animals with GDV . As the condition progressed, ani-
mals become weak and recumbent. Clinical signs of shock, 
such as a weak pulse, tachycardia, prolonged CRT, and pale 
mucous membranes, may be present. Tachypnoea and dys-
pnea may also be present.
Diagnosis can be done mainly from the history, clini -
cal signs, and physical examination. Hematological ab -
normalities including leukocytosis and thrombocytopenia 
may be evident. Biochemical changes depend on the organs 
affected like elevated liver enzymes, bilirubin, BUN, and 
FIG. 5 Rotation of stomach in GDV .

276 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
creatinine. Radiographic examination is not required for di-
agnosis of GDV but it will help to differentiate from GD. 
Animals with GDV will reveal a typical double bubble ap -
pearance (Monnet, 2003). Free gases in the abdominal cav-
ity indicate perforation of the stomach.
GD without volvulus, abdominal effusion, food en -
gorgement, and abdominal masses has to be deferentially 
diagnosed with the help of abdominal radiography. Lateral 
abdominal radiography reveals two different gas-filled 
compartments indicating GDV (Fig. 6).
The primary aim is to stabilize the patient before surgi -
cal correction. The animal may be in shock, so fluid therapy 
at a shock dose (90  mL/kg) should be initiated as soon as 
possible (hypertonic crystalloid or colloid followed by iso -
tonic crystalloids). Avoid veins in the hind quarter as the 
caudal vena cava is obstructed ( Sullivan and Yool, 1998). 
Decompression and stabilization of the stomach can be 
achieved by orogastric intubation. If orogastric intubation is 
not possible, percutaneous decompression can be achieved 
by gastrocentesis with large bore needles caudal to the ribs 
on the side with maximum distension and tympany. The 
animals with GDV are suffering from severe discomfort 
which may be addressed with opioid analgesics (morphine 
or methadone at a dose of 0.1–0.3  mg/kg i.m. or fentanyl 
2–4 μg/kg i.v.). Oxygen supplementation will help the ani -
mals with respiratory discomfort. Broad-spectrum antibiot-
ics like cephazolin (22 mg/kg i.v. every 2 h) or a combination 
of ampicillin (22 mg/kg i.v. every 8 h), cefuroxime (20 mg/
kg), and enrofloxacin (5–10  mg/kg every 24  h) are recom -
mended because of the impaired gastric mucosal barrier. 
Once the animal is stabilized, surgical correction of gastric 
dilatation-volvulus is performed to de-rotate the stomach, 
evaluate the viability of the stomach and spleen, perform a 
gastrectomy or a splenectomy if needed, and pexy the stom-
ach to prevent reoccurrence.
Prevention of GDV in animals depends on several fac -
tors like avoiding heavy feeding (once daily) instead more 
frequent small quantity meals are preferred. Avoid foods 
with particle diameter  < 30 mm. Separate feeding to the 
dogs is preferred to reduce sudden intake. Reduce stress as 
it is a predisposing factor. Prophylactic gastropexy is indi -
cated in animals with a risk of GDV .
2.2 Gastritis
Gastritis is the term used for inflammation of the stomach 
characterized by vomiting. Based on the onset and dura -
tion of vomiting, gastritis is divided into acute or chronic. 
Sudden onset of vomiting is the main characteristic of acute 
gastritis whereas intermittent and prolonged vomiting is an 
indication of chronic gastritis. Gastritis is classified based 
on the onset, nature of predominant cellular infiltrate, pres-
ence of architectural abnormalities, and etiology (Fig. 7).
2.2.1 Acute gastritis
Dietary carelessness, consumption of coarse foreign bodies, 
plant materials, chemicals irritants, medication (NSAIDs, 
glucocorticoids), viral diseases (e.g., canine parvovirus, 
FIG. 6 Right later radiograph of nondescript dog showing gastric dila -
tion and volvulus dog with typical revealing double bubble appearance to 
the stomach—showing air dilation and a shelf of stomach wall from the 
twist in the stomach.
FIG. 7 Classification of gastritis.

Gastrointestinal disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 18  277
 feline panleukopenia, canine distemper), and bacterial in -
fections (e.g., Helicobacter spp.) are the main cause of 
acute gastritis (Webb and Twedt, 2003).
The predominant clinical sign is vomiting. V omitus may 
contain food, bile, froth, frank blood, digested blood, or evi-
dence of an ingested substance.
History and clinical signs may help in the diagnosis 
of acute gastritis. History of toxin ingestion or foreign 
body is indicative of the acute condition. The animal 
with a prying posture is suggestive of acute gastric pain. 
Radiographic evaluation with plain and contrast medium 
may help to find out the foreign bodies and the ulcers in 
the gastric mucosa. Endoscopy or gastric ultrasonography 
may be useful.
The treatment for acute gastritis may be initiated with 
complete gastric rest for 12–24  h with no oral food. Easily 
digestible bland food can be given in low quantity with in -
creased frequency. Isotonic crystalloids may be used to cor-
rect dehydration, relative polycythemia, hypokalemia, and 
hyponatremia with potassium supplementation. Stoppage 
of drugs (NSAID and steroid) is indicated in drug-induced 
gastritis. In case of protracted vomiting antiemetic’s like 
maropitant (1 mg/kg/day, s.c. or i.v., or 2  mg/kg/day, p.o.) 
or ondansetron (0.1–1  mg/kg, p.o. or i.v., bid) or metoclo -
pramide (0.3 mg/kg, p.o. or s.c., tid) can be used. Gastric 
protectants include H-2 receptor antagonists (cimetidine, 
ranitidine @ 2 mg/kg bid, famotidine @0.5 mg/kg bid), pro-
ton pump inhibitors (omeprazole @ 1 mg/kg p.o. o.d., pan-
toprazole @ 1 mg/kg i.v.), cytoprotectants (sucralfate), and 
synthetic prostaglandins (misoprostol @ 0.5–2.3 μg/lb) may 
be used in case of gastric ulceration.
2.2.2 Chronic gastritis
Chronic gastritis is characterized by intermittent vomit -
ing for more than 1–2  weeks. Chronic gastritis is classified 
based on the nature of cellular infiltrates (eosinophilic, lym-
phoplasmacytic, granulomatous, or lymphoid follicular), 
the presence of architectural abnormalities (atrophy, hyper-
trophy, fibrosis, edema, ulceration, or metaplasia), severity 
(mild, moderate or severe). Food allergy or intolerance is 
also a possible reason ( Patel et al., 2018 ). The most com -
mon clinical signs are intermittent vomiting (bile or food), 
anorexia, lethargy, and weight loss. The fungal infection 
may cause abdominal masses, lymphadenopathy, or ocu -
lar changes. Gastric foreign bodies, food allergies, irritant 
drugs, parasites, fungal infections, or bacterial infections 
are considered the cause of chronic gastritis.
An abdominal radiograph may reveal a diffusely thick -
ened gastric wall ( Fig.  8), the presence of foreign bodies 
(Fig. 9), and contrast radiography is required for identify -
ing gastric ulcers and radiolucent foreign bodies ( Fig. 10A 
and B). Endoscopic examination may reveal foreign bodies, 
hemorrhage, ulceration, abnormal content, parasites, or hy-
perplasia. Bacterial isolation of the gastric content is useful 
to know the Helicobacter spp. infection. Gastric biopsies 
are required to understand the cellular infiltrate.
2.2.3 Parasitic gastritis
Parasitic gastritis is comparatively rare in small animals; 
Spirocerca lupi, Gnathostoma spinigerum , Ollulanus tri -
cuspis (cats) , Physaloptera rara , Physaloptera canis , 
Heterobilharzia americana are the major culprit in para -
sitic gastritis 23. Antinematodal drugs like fenbendazole @ 
10 mg/kg or pyrantel pamoate @ 5 mg/kg can be effectively 
used to treat the parasitic gastritis.
2.2.4 Mycotic gastritis
Mycotic gastritis is characterized by fungal granulomas 
which may obstruct gastric outflow. Gastric phycomycosis 
is characterized by minute nonspecific changes to thicken -
ing mucosal folds of the gastric wall with outlet hindrance. 
Histoplasma capsulatum is a dimorphic fungi that can cause 
FIG. 8 Chronic gastritis in a dog revealing diffusely thickened stomach 
wall.
FIG. 9 Right lateral radiograph of dog showing gravel sign in the stom -
ach due to a chronic, partial outflow obstruction. Small, radiopaque frag -
ments of ingesta accumulate in a distended pylorus.

278 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
subclinical or clinical granulomatous condition among 
other organs including the GI tract. Pyogenic granulomas 
are commonly encountered in Pythium insidiosum infection 
which may produce pyogenic granulomas in mucosa and 
submucosa of the stomach and different places of the GI 
tract (Amorim et al., 2016). Cryptococcus neoformans may 
also act as a cause of granulomatous gastritis which obstruct 
gastric outflow.
If the granulomas are obstructing gastric outflow, they 
should be removed surgically and treated with systemic 
antifungal drugs including itraconazole (10  mg/kg p.o. 
sid) and terbinafine (5–10  mg/kg p.o. sid) for 2–3  months 
post-surgery.
2.2.5 Gastritis due Helicobacter spp.
Helicobacter pylori  is considered as major pathogen in 
human beings, whereas the prevalence of H. pylori is not 
common in dogs and cats. H. felis, Helicobacter bizzozero-
nii, and Helicobacter heilmannii sensu stricto ( s.s.) are the 
predominant species isolated from canine and feline gastri-
tis cases ( Taillieu et al., 2022 ). H. pylori have been rarely 
identified in the canine stomach. Helicobacter spp. popu -
lations are frequently seen in the fundus and body of the 
stomach. “Triple therapy” with amoxicillin 20  mg/kg bid, 
metronidazole 10 mg/kg bid, and antacid famotidine or with 
three antibiotics (amoxicillin (20 mg/kg p.o. bid), clarithro-
mycin (7.5  mg/kg p.o. bid), and metronidazole (10  mg/kg 
p.o. bid) for 14 days) may be effective against Helicobacter 
organism. Alternative eradication therapy with tetracycline 
20 mg/kg BID and omeprazole 0.7 mg/kg o.d. administered 
orally for the next 10 and 14 days.
2.2.6 Gastritis due to other conditions
Portal hypertension due to hepatic disease leads to change in 
gastric flow, reduced epithelial turnover, hyperacidity, and 
raised serum bile acid concentration which in turn stimulate 
secretion of Gastrin-17 and finally ends up with apoptosis 
of gastric epithelial cells (Ozaki et al., 2002).
The mast cell tumor releases histamine which binds to 
H2 receptors on gastric parietal cells, and stimulate acid 
secretion.
Clearance of Gastrin-17 is mainly through the kidney, 
so renal diseases hamper the clearance of Gastrin-17 which 
lead to hypergastrinemia and increased gastric acid produc-
tion. It is the main cause of vomiting and gastric ulcer for -
mation in renal disease ( Peters et al., 2005 ). Renal failure 
also causes uremia and urea diffuses from interstitial fluids 
to the stomach, resulting in damage to the epithelial cell 
layer of the gastric wall.
Appropriate therapy has to be initiated to control the 
systemic illness is warranted to alleviate the gastritis is rec-
ommended along with proper diet. Gastric imaging and bi -
opsies are needed for further diagnosis.
2.2.7 Lymphocytic-plasmacytic gastritis and 
eosinophilic gastritis
Chronic gastritis is classified based on the nature of cellular 
infiltrate with lymphocyte and plasma cells or eosinophils. 
Lymphoplasmacytic gastritis is reported in Helicobacter 
spp. An infection is characterized with or without hyperpla-
sia of lymphoid follicles, infiltration of lymphocytes, and 
other inflammatory cells, including Russell bodies into the 
lamina propria layer of the stomach. Eosinophilic gastritis 
can be diffuse like widespread hypersensitivity reaction or 
focal. It may be due to an allergy to food or parasites or 
mastocytoma (Amorim et al., 2016).
Mild or moderate lesions can be treated symptomatically 
with a hypoallergic diet. In severe cases, immunosuppres -
sive therapy can be initiated with prednisolone 2 mg/kg/day 
and tapered to a minimum dose. In the case of  nonresponsive 
FIG. 10 (A) Contrast radiography showing radiolucent mango kernel in the pyloric area. (B) Mango kernel defecated after laxative therapy.

Gastrointestinal disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 18  279
dogs or prolonged steroid therapy, other drugs like azathio-
prine 2 mg/kg, p.o., every 24–48 h or cyclosporine 5 mg/kg, 
p.o., twice daily can be considered. Chlorambucil 2 mg/cat, 
p.o., every 48–72 h for 2–4 weeks then tapered to 2 mg every 
72–96 h may be a safer alternative to azathioprine in cats 
(p.o.). Delayed gastric emptying may respond to prokinetic 
agents (metoclopramide, erythromycin or cisapride).
2.2.8 Chronic atrophic gastritis
Chronic atrophic gastritis is characterized by diffuse lesions 
in the fundus and body of the stomach and reduced mucosal 
layer thickening as well as hypochlorhydria, achlorhydria, 
and a proportionally increased number of mucus- producing 
cells within the gland. Glandular atrophy mononuclear 
infiltration, regenerative glandular nesting and mucosal 
fibrosis and loss of feedback mechanism may lead to in -
creased serum gastrin level which causes gastric ulceration. 
Treatment options include dietary management and im -
mune suppression.
2.2.9 Chronic hypertrophic gastropathy
It can be focal or diffuse based on the hypertrophic le -
sions present in the gastric mucosa, muscularis, or both 
(Walter et al., 1985 ). Focal-type chronic hypertrophy was 
reported in animals with chronic administration of aspirin. 
Hypertrophic glandular gastritis is seen in Basenji dogs 
(diffused immune proliferative enteropathy) and other dogs 
(hypergastrinemia). Chronic hypertrophic pyloric hypertro-
phy is characterized by hypertrophy of the mucosal layer 
of the antropyloric stomach which obstructs gastric outflow 
and leads to projectile vomiting. Surgical correction of hy -
pertrophied tissue may be required.
2.3 Gastric/peptic ulceration
Ulcers are mucosal defects that penetrate through the mus -
cularis mucosa, and may be attributed to many etiologies, 
usually known as peptic ulcers. This includes ulcers in the 
stomach and duodenal mucosa as both are bathed by pepsin. 
Physical damage to the gastric mucosa, impaired mucosal de-
fense and chemical alteration to the mucosa and its repair pro-
cess can lead to gastric ulcer formation (Parrah et al., 2013).
2.3.1 Etiology of gastric ulcers
● Nonsteroidal and steroidal (glucocorticoid) anti-  
inflammatory drugs.
● Primary neoplastic conditions like stomach carcinoma, 
gastric intestinal lymphoma.
● Gastrinoma and disseminated mast cell disease.
● Exogenous toxins—ingestion of household cleaning 
chemical (phenol), lead, and various plants.
● Systemic diseases like hepatic, renal, Addison’s disease, 
or shock.
Gastric ulcers are classified according to depth (super -
ficial or deep), clinical presentation (acute or chronic), and 
anatomical location (glandular mucosal ulceration, general-
ized gastritis, focal duodenal ulceration, duodenal erosions, 
or duodenitis).
The major clinical sign of gastric ulceration is vomit -
ing, abdominal pain, hemoptysis, melena, weight loss, and 
anemia. Animals with gastric ulceration can be presented 
with or without melena or hemoptysis. Gastric or duodenal 
perforation may result in the sudden onset of fever, severe 
abdominal pain, weakness, abdominal distension, and death 
due to peritonitis.
History of NSAID therapy, ingestion of poisons, or 
other systemic diseases like hepatopathy or neoplasia may 
help to identify the cause. Anemia, hypoproteinemia, and 
uremia may be seen in animals with gastric ulcers indicat -
ing severity or other inciting causes. Diagnostic radiogra -
phy (plain and contrast) will help to identify the foreign 
bodies and ulcers. Endoscopy is considered as the gold 
standard for the diagnosis of ulcers and it helps to take 
the biopsy.
Treatment is primarily aimed to remove the underlying 
causes like NSAID or corticosteroid therapy, Helicobacter 
infection, foreign bodies, or alleviating systemic condi -
tions like hepatic, and renal disorders. Supportive therapy 
for ulcer healing includes maintaining mucosal perfusion, 
decreasing gastric acidity, protecting ulcer, and correcting 
secondary conditions may be considered.
Food is withheld initially to avoid stimulation of gastric 
acid and pepsin secretion followed by the diet recommenda-
tion for gastritis. Gastric acid secretion can be controlled by 
H2 blockers (cimetidine, ranitidine, or famotidine) or pro -
ton pump inhibitors (omeprazole, pantoprazole, lansopra -
zole, rabeprazole). The cytoprotective agents like sucralfate 
(dogs: 0.5–1 g, p.o., 2–3 times daily; cats: 0.25  g, p.o., 2–3 
times daily) or the prostaglandin E2 analog (misoprostol) 
can be considered. Perforated ulcers warrant surgical cor -
rection along with antibiotic therapy. Animals with perfo -
rated ulcers are having a poor prognosis.
3 Diseases of small intestine
The SI is basically a tube, beginning at the pylorus of the 
stomach and ending at the ileocolic valve. It is acting as 
an interface between the external environment (proximally 
from the mouth via the esophagus and stomach, and distally 
to the anus via the large intestine) and the body, and is both 
an absorptive surface and a barrier. It is divided arbitrarily 
into three anatomic segments: the duodenum proximally, 
then the jejunum, and finally the ileum distally. The SI mu-
cosa performs the intestinal barrier and absorptive functions 
and is comprised of an intestinal epithelium covering the 
lamina propria that hosts the local mucosal immune system 
and is surrounded by the submucosa and the outer muscle

280 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
layers. The small intestine is innervated by vagal, parasym-
pathetic, and sympathetic efferent fibers.
The basic functions of the SI are digestion, absorption, 
and elimination, which occur as a result of complex inter -
cellular interactions between epithelial cells, immune cells, 
mesenchymal and neuronal cells, and with luminal nutrients 
and microbes. Slow wave, segmental, and peristaltic con -
tractions of the SI are generated in response to spontaneous 
electrical activity. Segmental contractions slow intestinal 
transit and ensure mixing and digestion of nutrients until 
peristalsis propels the ingesta onwards.
The cardinal sign of the small intestinal disease is di -
arrhea. V omiting of blood may indicate gastric and/or up -
per GI bleeding (Fig. 11A and B), and copious volumes of 
bilious vomit are suggestive of upper GI obstruction. More 
distal obstructions of the SI may be infrequent vomiting of 
fecal-like material. Small intestinal diarrhea is normally of 
large volume and watery, with reduced frequency each day. 
Intussusceptions cause vomiting and a variable amount of 
jelly-like blood in feces. Nonspecific signs of SI disease, 
such as dehydration and weight loss, are readily apparent, 
and fever is sometimes present with infectious enteritis. 
Abdominal palpation is best performed with gradual, gentle, 
manual pressure on the abdomen. Free fluid within the peri-
toneal cavity should be detected by ballottement. Results of 
the hemogram, serum biochemistry, and urinalysis are often 
more reflective of hydration status, and to rule out diseases 
in other organ systems that may manifest with SI signs. 
Fecal sample examinations are important in diagnosis of 
small intestinal diseases. It includes direct fecal smear ex -
amination, rectal cytology, fecal concentration techniques, 
bacteriologic examination by routine culture or molecular 
fingerprinting, virologic examination, examination of pro -
tozoa, occult blood examination, α-protease inhibitor, and 
fecal calprotectin test ( Murphy et al., 2003 ). Serum folate 
and cobalamin concentration are markers of GI disease as 
well as indicators of the need for vitamin supplementation. 
Survey plain radiographs are most useful in the diagnosis 
of SI disease associated with vomiting, abdominal pain, 
and abnormal masses on palpation. Contrast radiography 
may confirm the presence of radiolucent foreign bodies, 
ulcers, and mucosal aberrations and assess the rate of intes-
tinal transit. Transabdominal ultrasound examination of the 
small intestine can detect layering of the wall, peristalsis, 
ileus, and luminal contents, and can measure SI wall thick-
ness. It is useful in the detection of lesions such as intussus-
ceptions, masses, radiolucent foreign bodies, intestinal wall 
thickening, and lymphadenopathy in chronic inflammatory, 
lymphatic, and neoplastic enteropathies.
3.1 Protein-losing enteropathy
Protein-losing enteropathy (PLE) is defined as the loss of 
protein from the intestines due to intestinal disease resulting 
in hypoalbuminemia and hypoglobulinemia ( Peterson and 
Willard, 2003). Strictly, any condition leading to abnormal 
protein loss from the intestines is a PLE.
Lymphangiectasia and alimentary tract lymphoma are 
the most common causes in adult dogs and young dogs 
hook worms and chronic intussusception are found to be 
the more common cause. The three basic mechanisms for 
protein loss are lymphatic obstruction or rupture (Intestinal 
lymphangiectasia), increased mucosal permeability because 
of mucosal infiltrates (e.g., inflammatory and neoplastic), 
and mechanical causes (e.g., ulcers, erosions, and conges -
tion) (Fig. 12).
Any age, breed, or sex of dog may develop PLE. 
However, breeds like Yorkshire Terriers, Soft-Coated 
Wheaten Terriers, Norwegian Lundehunds, and Basenjis 
are demonstrated to be at higher risk. Diarrhea, vomiting, 
and weight loss are the most common clinical signs of PLE 
in dogs (Vaden, 2008). Diarrhea is inconsistent and may not 
FIG. 11 (A) Haemorrhagic enteritis: Note the intestinal contents mixed with blood and blood clots. (B) Hemorrhagic enteritis: Note the RBCs in lamina 
propria and desquamated villi. Also note markedly engorged submucosal blood vessels (H & E, 100×).

Gastrointestinal disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 18  281
occur in some dogs. Other clinical signs including ascites, 
edema, and pleural effusion may occur mainly due to hy -
poalbuminemia. Pulmonary thromboembolism is also re -
ported due to antithrombin loss into the intestines.
PLE is often a diagnosis of exclusion. Patients typi -
cally have serum albumin ≤2.0 g/dL and other causes of 
hypoalbuminemia must be eliminated. PLN and hepatic in-
sufficiency are the two major differentials for this finding. 
Urinalysis/urine protein-to-creatinine ratio and hepatic func-
tion tests (e.g., serum bile acid concentrations) are typically 
needed to eliminate these syndromes. Measurement of fecal 
α1-PI concentrations is required for a definitive diagnosis. 
Changes on abdominal ultrasound can often be observed 
with PLE patients and may be indispensable in the detection 
of neoplastic masses, inflammatory infiltrates (which might 
permit diagnosis by fine-needle aspiration), and intussuscep-
tions. Ultrasound findings also may aid the clinician in de -
ciding whether to do endoscopic or full-thickness intestinal 
biopsies. In most cases when combined with the clinical pre-
sentation, laboratory tests, and imaging findings, histopatho-
logic analysis of endoscopic intestinal biopsies can lead to 
at least a provisional diagnosis and guide initial treatment.
The aims of therapy are to treat the underlying cause and 
to support the patient. There is no single treatment protocol 
as PLE has many underlying causes. The mainstay of treat-
ment for IL is feeding an ultra-low fat, highly digestible diet 
to minimize lacteal dilation and rupture. Anti-inflammatory 
or cytotoxic medications like prednisolone, azathioprine, 
and cyclosporin can be used in IL and IBD ( Bines, 2009). 
Monitoring the serum albumin concentration and body 
weight is probably the best way to monitor the patient’s re-
sponse to therapy.
3.2 Intestinal obstruction
Obstruction of the small intestine is a common reason 
for dysmotility, especially with luminal foreign bodies. 
Physical or mechanical obstructions can result from intra -
luminal foreign bodies, intramural masses, and extramural 
compression (Hayes, 2009). While these objects can lodge 
anywhere along the small or large intestine, there does not 
appear to be a predilection site, except that the jejunum, be-
cause of its length, many are diagnosed as lodged jejunal 
foreign bodies. Linear foreign bodies cause obstruction be-
cause of their ability to gather/pleat the intestine to cause 
partial or complete obstruction, and potential perforation, if 
not resolved. The severity of intestinal obstruction is clas -
sified according to a number of parameters including clini -
cal signs, site, and patency. If ingested nutrients are unable 
to pass beyond the point of obstruction, it is termed com -
plete obstruction ( Fig. 13). If some nutrients pass through 
the point of obstruction, even if only the liquid phase, it is 
termed partial obstruction (Fig. 14A and B). Functional ob-
structions result from generalized hypomotility or spasticity 
of a bowel segment ( Washabau, 2013). Foreign bodies can 
lodge anywhere along the small and large intestines, and 
there does not appear to be a predilection site, except that 
the jejunum, because of its length, is the most commonly af-
fected region. Linear foreign bodies may anchor around the 
base of the tongue, pylorus, or at more distal sites.
FIG. 12 Cause and common clinical signs of protein losing enteropathy.
FIG. 13 Part of small intestine after surgical correction of leaner foreign 
body by enterectomy.

282 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
Patients with complete intestinal obstruction often pres-
ent with acute signs of vomiting. Abdominal palpation, 
plain abdominal radiographs, or ultrasonographic imaging 
can be diagnostic if they reveal a foreign object or mass. In 
continuous radiographic imaging, failure of movement of a 
foreign body within 8 h and failure of the object to pass into 
the colon within 36 h are indications for surgery.
3.3 Intussusception
Intussusception is defined as the telescoping of a proximal 
segment of the GI tract, called the intussusceptum, into the 
lumen of the adjacent distal segment of the GI tract, called in-
tussuscipiens (Madrewar and Yaqub, 2016). Intussusception 
occurs when a migrating peristaltic wave reaches a fixed 
or noncontractile segment. Intussusceptions are generally 
more common in younger animals. Any disease that can 
disturb intestinal motility, such as viral enteritis, neoplasia, 
foreign bodies, and prior abdominal surgery, can lead to in-
tussusceptions (Allman and Pastori, 2013). Intussusceptions 
are generally more common in younger animals. A most 
common type is ileocolic intussusceptions. Hematochezia, 
vomiting, abdominal pain, and a palpable abdominal mass 
are major clinical findings observed. Palpation of a firm 
tubular elongated structure (thickened sausage-shaped) 
suggestive of intussusceptions. Radiographs will show a 
typical pattern of intestinal obstruction with gas and fluid-
filled dilated loops of the bowel if the obstruction caused by 
the intussusception is complete. In cases of partial obstruc-
tion, there may not be significant signs on plain radiographs 
and a barium contrast study may be needed to identify the 
problem. In transverse ultrasonographic sections, the intus-
susception appeared as a multilayered series of concentric 
rings, or a target-like lesion. In longitudinal sections, the 
intussusception appeared as multiple hyperechoic and hy -
poechoic parallel lines. Intussusceptions are treated surgi -
cally. Preoperative correction of dehydration, electrolyte, 
and acid-base deficits is essential. Acute ones may be re -
duced or resected, whereas chronic ones usually must be 
resected.
3.4 Dysmotility
Ileus has been defined as the functional inhibition of pro -
pulsive bowel activity, irrespective of pathogenetic mecha-
nism. Ileus is very dangerous for dogs and is a common 
sequel to parvoviral enteritis, abdominal surgery, pancre -
atitis, peritonitis, endotoxemia, hypokalemia and dysauto -
nomia (Harkin et al., 2002 ). Symptoms and signs of ileus 
include abdominal distention, nausea, vomiting, and vague 
discomfort. The main objective of the diagnostic effort is to 
find the underlying cause of this problem. Results of rou -
tine laboratory testing (complete blood count, serum chem-
istry, urinalysis) may reveal some information related to the 
underlying disease. Abdominal X-rays and ultrasound will 
help in finding various abnormalities including the presence 
of gas, fluid, mechanical obstruction (e.g., foreign body), 
tumor in the abdomen, and other such conditions (Fig. 15A 
and B). Barium contrast series X-ray may reveal delayed 
gastric emptying. As ileus is a result of other diseases or 
conditions, treating the underlying cause is of utmost im -
portance. Additionally, fluid therapy and prokinetics are 
also given to stimulate intestinal movements. In some cases 
of ileus, surgery is necessary to remove the blockage.
4 Disorders of large intestine
The large intestine contributes 20%–25% of the total (small 
and large) intestinal consists of the cecum, colon, rectum, 
and anal canal. The major functions of LI are the extraction 
of water and electrolytes and the control of defecation. The 
large intestine accomplishes these functions by regulating 
fluid transport, bacterial fermentation, motility, immune 
surveillance, and blood flow.
FIG. 14 Abdomen lateral radiography showing partial obstruction.

Gastrointestinal disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 18  283
4.1 Colitis
Colitis is inflammation of the colon characterized by 
chronic diarrhea, common in dogs but less frequent 
in cats. Colitis is classified based on duration as acute 
or chronic and based on the nature of cell type invad -
ing the intestinal lamina propria, muscularis, and/
or mucosa as lymphocytic-plasmacytic, eosinophilic, 
neutrophilic, histiocytic ulcerative colitis, or granulo -
matous ( Cerquetella et al., 2010 ). The etiology of coli -
tis is multifactorial, requiring the presence of antigens, 
compromised colonocyte health, and breaks in natural 
protective mechanisms ( Atreya et al., 2008 ). The etiol -
ogy for the colitis may be dietary factors (food allergy, 
deconjugated bile acids, unabsorbed fat, etc.), parasites 
(Trichuris vulpis , Giardiasis, Ancylostoma  spp., Coccidia  
spp., Tritrichomonas foetus  in cats, Balantidium coli , 
Toxoplasma gondii ), bacterial infections (clostrid -
ial infections, Salmonella  spp., Campylobacter  spp., 
Salmonella  spp.), fungal infections ( Histoplasma 
capsulatum , Pythium insidiosum ), algal infections 
(Prototheca), IBD, stress, immune mediated (increased 
permeability, reduced immune tolerance), genetic pre -
disposition, neoplasia (adenocarcinoma, lymphoma, ad -
enomatous polyps), and autoimmune conditions.
The common clinical sign of colitis is chronic or inter -
mittent large bowel diarrhea characterized by the presence 
of mucus, hematochezia, dyschezia, abdominal discomfort, 
tenesmus, and abdominal pain. Frequency and urgency of 
defecation may be increased but with a reduced quantity 
of feces. V omiting may or may not be present. Reduced 
weight gain is noticed in chronic cases; however, it is com-
mon with small intestinal disorders. Large bowel diarrhea 
can be differentiated from small bowel diarrhea following 
clinical signs.
The difference in clinical signs between of large bowel 
diarrhea and small bowel diarrhea.
Clinical sign
Small intestinal 
disease
Large intestinal 
disease
Presence of mucus Absent Present
Hematochezia Absent Present
Frequency of 
evacuation
Normal/mild 
increase (2–4 times 
per day)
Increased (greater 
than four times 
per day)
Fecal volume per 
defecation
Increased Decreased
Melena Present Absent
Tenesmus Absent Present
Steatorrhea Present Absent
Urgency Usually absent Present
Flatulence Present Uncommon
General condition Lethargy Usually unaltered
Appetite Inappetence, 
anorexia
Usually unaltered
Abdominal 
discomfort
Present Present
Vomiting Present Usually absent
Weight loss Present Absent
4.2 Acute colitis
Acute colitis is a sudden onset of watery diarrhea with typi-
cal characteristics of large intestine diarrhea usually asso -
ciated with toxin (spoiled food). It is usually self-limiting, 
FIG. 15 (A) Right lateral radiograph of dog showing paralytic with dilated intestinal loop filled with air. (B) Right lateral contrast radiograph of dog 
showing severely distended intestinal loop.

284 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
responds well with empirical therapy, and has a good prog-
nosis. Treatment may include fluids therapy along with 
antibiotics (metronidazole) or sulfasalazine and/or dietary 
therapy (an easily digestible, hypoallergenic diet). Parasitic 
infestation may be ruled out before any treatment.
4.3 Chronic enteropathy
Chronic enteropathy (CE) is a term used for gastrointestinal 
diseases (anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea) present for a dura-
tion of 3 weeks or longer, when other causes such as parasitic 
disease or neoplastic disease are ruled out. Based on response 
to the treatment, CE is divided into food-responsive enteropa-
thy, antibiotic-responsive enteropathy, immunosuppressant- 
responsive enteropathy (including steroid-responsive 
diarrhea) and nonresponsive enteropathy, and protein-losing 
enteropathy (Dandrieux and Mansfield, 2019 ; Jergens and 
Heilmann, 2022). Based on the predominant cell infiltrate, 
CE is again classified into (lymphocytic plasmacytic colitis), 
eosinophils (eosinophilic colitis), neutrophils (suppurative or 
neutrophilic colitis), macrophages (granulomatous colitis), or 
a combination thereof. Colitis is the term used for the inflam-
mation of the colon alone, whereas enterocolitis is used for 
inflammation of the entire GI tract. The term inflammatory 
bowel disease (IBD) is often used to refer to CE. One of the 
three factors is (a) the presence of bacteria in the intestinal 
lumen with potential dysbiosis in the luminal microbiome; 
(b) defective mucosal barrier function that allows contact of 
bacterial and/or food antigens with immune cells in the lam-
ina propria; and (c) an aberrant mucosal immune response to 
antigens is necessary to initiate CE.
Clinical signs include weight loss, anorexia, intermit -
tent vomiting, and diarrhea. Clinical signs mainly depend 
on the area of lesion in the GI tract like cranial abdominal 
pain in duodenal ulcers. Diarrhea may be large bowel or 
small bowel based on the content, frequency, the presence 
of blood, etc.
The diagnosis of CE is based on the recognition of clini-
cal signs, the exclusion of other causes, and the severity of 
the clinical case. The coprological examination is consid -
ered a preliminary test for screening GI parasites which can 
cause similar symptoms. Changes like anemia, eosinophilia, 
lymphopenia, and thrombocytosis can be seen in the blood 
values. Anemia is mainly due to iron deficiency, because of 
chronic GI blood loss, or to the chronic inflammatory state 
that occurs (Marchetti et al., 2010). The finding of eosino -
philia can be associated either with the presence of parasites 
or allergies or in cases of eosinophilic enteritis. Lymphopenia 
is a frequent finding in dogs with protein-losing enteropa -
thies along with thrombocytosis. Mild hypoalbuminemia is 
seen in CE due to malabsorption, the marked decrease is no-
ticed in protein-losing enteropathies (Craven and Washabau, 
2019). Liver enzymes (ALT and AST) may be slightly in -
creased during CEs, due to nonspecific reactive hepatitis 
linked to impaired intestinal absorption. Alterations in elec-
trolytes (sodium, potassium, chlorine) are usually found 
only in cases of severe symptoms with severe GI losses and 
may be associated with increased renal parameters (prerenal 
azotemia) for dehydration. Malabsorption in CE causes hy-
pocalcemia and hypocholesterolemia. Decreased serum co-
balamin may be seen in dogs with CE. In less severe cases, 
and in particular in dogs with food-responsive enteropathy, 
there may be no alterations, or in any case there may be 
slightly nonspecific alterations.
The radiographic examination will reveal foreign bodies 
in the GI tract. Ultrasound alterations that are frequently en-
countered during CIEs are hyperechogenicity of the mucosa, 
lymphangiectasia, abdominal lymphadenopathy, loss of dis-
tinction of stratigraphy, increased thickness of the intestinal 
wall, alterations of peristalsis, and presence of tumors.
The endoscopic examination will be done after a dietary 
trial and antibiotic therapy. Endoscopy or colonoscopy is 
used to localize the lesion, viz., erythema, friability, en -
hanced granularity, erosion, and ulceration. The purpose of 
the histopathologic evaluation of a biopsy specimen is to 
distinguish normal from pathologic tissue, to characterize 
the nature and severity of the alterations, and to provide a 
diagnosis of the type of inflammation.
The sequential management of chronic enteropathy is 
detailed in Fig. 16. The treatment of CEs involves a thera -
peutic trial includes a dietary change to be continued for 
a minimum period of about 3  weeks), the introduction of 
antimicrobials (tylosin, tetracycline ( Dandrieux et  al., 
2019), doxycycline, azithromycin, enrofloxacin, rifaximin 
(Menozzi et al., 2016), and metronidazole (Jergens, 1999)), 
but recently this step is replaced using probiotics, endos -
copy of the digestive tract with biopsy samples, and the ad-
ministration of an immunosuppressant.
A change in diet may help the animal to get rid of an 
adverse food reaction, food allergy, and/or food intolerance. 
Diet alone can help roughly 50% of CE patients ( Tolbert 
et  al., 2022 ). It also helps to change the microbiota in 
the intestine. Dietary intervention may include high fiber 
content (i.e., prebiotics), specific diets (hydrolyzed diet, 
limited- ingredient diet), reduction of fat, gluten-free diet, 
or parenteral nutrition. Improvement in the condition may 
be noticed within 14  days after changing diets, and several 
diets may need to be tested.
Oral antimicrobials may alleviate the symptoms in 
antibiotic-sensitive enteropathy. Oxytetracycline (10  mg/
kg, p.o., tid), metronidazole (10  mg/kg, p.o., bid), tylosin 
(5 mg/kg, p.o., o.d., or up to 20  mg/kg tid), or enrofloxa -
cin (10–15  mg/kg, o.d.) can be used to treat CE in dogs. 
Relapse of cases along with antibiotic resistance menace 
and changes in a pet’s gut microbiome due to prolonged 
use of antibiotics, the use of probiotics (i.e., Lactobacillus 
spp., Bifidobacterium spp., Saccharomyces spp.), are rec -
ommended before antibiotic trial.

Gastrointestinal disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 18  285
Sulfasalazine (and related drugs), which act as local 
anti-inflammatory action as the intestinal microflora release 
5-aminosalicylic acid, are often used in dogs with large 
bowel disorders. Other drugs include olsalazine (dogs: 10–
20 mg/kg, p.o., three times daily) and mesalamine (dogs: 
10 mg/kg, p.o., three times daily) may be recommended 
as they are having less side effects than sulfasalazine. The 
adverse effect of sulfasalazine is keratoconjunctivitis sicca 
and vasculitis which makes it not a suitable candidate for 
feline.
If the animal is not responsive to the above trials, histo-
logical examination of endoscopy-guided biopsies is rec -
ommended. Based on the type and severity of inflammatory 
infiltrate found, immunosuppressive can be initiated. The 
most used immunosuppressive drugs for CEs are cortico -
steroids (prednisolone 1–2  mg/kg every 12  h; 20% dosage 
reduction every 15–20  days and budesonide 1  mg/m2/day, 
p.o. in dogs, and 1  mg/cat/day, p.o., in cats), cyclosporine 
(3–5 mg/kg p.o. every 12 h or 24 h), chlorambucil (2–6 mg/
m2 p.o. every 24 h or 48 h), and azathioprine (1–2 mg/kg p.o. 
every 24 h).
Malabsorption due to CE may cause various deficiencies 
in vitamins and minerals like cobalamin, folate, calcium, 
and magnesium. Supplementation of cobalamin (20  mg/
kg, s.c., every 7  days), folate (1–5  mg/dog/day), calcium 
(10% calcium gluconate 0.5–1.5 mL/kg along with vitamin 
D—0.025–0.06 μg/kg/day) are recommended to correct the 
deficiencies.
Fecal microbial transplantation (also known as micro -
biome restoration therapy or MBRT) can restore gut micro-
biota, and has proven to be effective in both animals and 
humans.
4.4 Constipation, obstipation, and megacolon
Constipation is defined as absent, infrequent, or difficult 
defecation associated with the retention of feces within 
the colon and rectum. Prolonged constipation results in 
harder and drier feces that become impacted, as water is 
continuously absorbed through mucosa which results in 
excessively hard feces that defecation cannot occur this 
is known as obstipation. Chronic, recurrent constipation, 
and obstipation can result in megacolon, which refers to a 
flaccid distended, and extremely irreversibly dilated, and 
hypomotile colon that is not responsive to therapy. Severe 
colonic dilation, recurrent constipation, and obstipation due 
to idiopathic smooth muscle dysfunction lead to megaco -
lon in cats. Underlying causes and predisposing factors of 
constipation include dietary factors, environmental factors, 
painful defecation, anorectal or colonic obstruction, neuro -
muscular diseases eases, fluid and electrolyte disturbances, 
and drug-related effects.
Causes for constipation can be categorized as either me-
chanical obstruction or functional disorders. Mechanical 
obstructions include the narrowing of the pelvic canal 
which can happen due to pelvic fractures or luxations, 
prostatomegaly, enlargement of the iliac lymph nodes, or 
neoplasia: bony, prostatic, urogenital. Other causes for me-
chanical obstruction are a distal colonic or rectal foreign 
body, colonic or rectal neoplasia, strictures, and chronic, 
recurrent obstipation. Functional disorders can be dysauto -
nomia (rare), sacral spinal cord or pelvic nerve dysfunction, 
or autonomic ganglioneuritis in dogs (rare). Megacolon 
without any known cause comes under Idiopathic acquired 
megacolon.
The signs of constipation are usually evident to own -
ers with a history of reduced, absent, or painful defecation 
and producing very hard feces. In the case of megacolon, 
a history of prior recurrent episodes of constipation or ob -
stipation will be present. Affected cats are presented with 
anorexia, dehydration, weight loss, diarrhea, vomiting, 
and lethargy. Physical examination confirms the presence 
of colonic impaction in the affected animal. Feline severe 
idiopathic megacolon is characterized by abdominal pain 
and mesenteric lymphadenopathy. Also assess for contrib -
uting causes, including musculoskeletal and neurological 
FIG. 16 Sequential management of chronic enteropathy.

286 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
conditions. Radiography reveals pathognomonic signs in 
the diagnosis of constipation, obstipation, or megacolon. 
Colonoscopy, biopsy, and histopathology may be required 
to definitively diagnose neoplasia and other causes like in -
flammatory lesions, strictures, sacculations, and diverticula. 
Extraluminal mass lesions are detected by abdominal ul -
trasonography, whereas intraluminal mass lesions are best 
evaluated by endoscopy. Cerebrospinal fluid analysis, CT 
or magnetic resonance imaging (MRI), and electrophysio -
logic studies should be considered in animals with evidence 
of neurologic impairment. Hydration and electrolyte status 
are also important factors in the constipated cat which in -
cludes hypokalemia and hypocalcemia.
4.4.1 Management
The same principles of management can be applied in all 
cases:
1. Ensure removal of obstructing feces by 5 mL of sodium 
lauryl sulfoacetate, stimulant laxatives (bisacodyl), or 
emollient laxatives (sodium docusate @ 50  mg/cat p.o. 
bid) that have reportedly been used.
2. Ensure colonic motility and smooth passage of feces by 
laxatives and prokinetic agents like cisapride at 2.5  mg/
cat, bid, p.o.
3. Reducing fecal bulk is an important part of long-term 
management by increasing the amount of dietary fiber.
4. Ensure adequate hydration—fluid therapy is indicated 
to ensure adequate hydration. Wet food diets help to en-
sure adequate water intake and therefore help maintain 
hydration.
5. Manage underlying problems.
Megacolon is unmanageable to medical and dietary 
therapy; so, to be defined as having megacolon, a cat may 
have had several episodes of obstipation managed by enema 
as well as dietary trials and medical therapy with cisapride 
and an osmotic or emollient laxative; yet the cat will still 
obstruct with feces and then the only possible therapy is 
subtotal colectomy. A Subtotal colectomy is considered an 
important surgical treatment for feline idiopathic mega -
colon (Colopy-Poulsen et al., 2005 ). Nemeth et al. (2008)  
results emphasized the long-term effectiveness of subtotal 
colectomy with preservation of the ileocolic junction.

Gastrointestinal disorders of dogs and cats  Chapter | 18  287

289

Chapter 19
Occular manifestation of infectious and 
noninfestious disease of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
The most important managemental practice for pet owners 
is proper eye care, and some of the most common ocular 
problems companion animals may experience are scratches, 
ulcers, dry eye, infection, and metabolic problems, leading 
to ocular problems. Various infectious problems leading to 
ocular problems include bacterial infection, viral infection, 
and parasitic infection. And among noninfectious causes of 
ocular problems in dogs and cats is an underlying metabolic 
problem.
2 Systemic diseases with ocular 
manifestation
2.1 Canine distemper
Canine distemper, a viral disease caused by the paramyxo -
virus virus, causes optic neuritis which is most commonly 
found in young pups of age 3–6 months of age or unvac -
cinated or immunocompromised adults (Fig. 1). Distemper 
ocular clinical manifestations include bilateral conjuncti -
vitis with a discharge that progresses from serous to mu -
copurulent (Fig. 2). The palpebral conjunctiva is the most 
affected. Lacrimal adenitis can cause decreased tear produc-
tion, which can lead to more severe conjunctivitis, corneal 
ulceration, and pain. When an animal recovers from a sys -
temic infection, the dry eye usually goes away. Distemper 
is not always suspected because conjunctival or lacrimal 
involvement has such mild systemic symptoms (Greene and 
Appel, 2006).
Another thing in CD-affected ones is the retrobulbar 
optic nerve, which includes the optic chiasm, and the op -
tic nerve head, which may be affected by the inflammation 
associated with optic neuritis, is a serious condition. The 
physiologic cup may not be present and the optic nerve 
head will seem high (swollen) with blurry edges when it is 
 affected. Also, optic neuritis may be accompanied by peri -
papillary edema, retinitis, and localized bleeding within the 
optic nerve head (Brooks, 2007).
Retinal degeneration and necrosis result in gray-to-pink 
irregular densities on the tapetal or non-tapetal fundus, or 
both. Where exudates dissect between the retina and cho -
roid, bullous or complete retinal detachment can occur. 
Chronic, dormant fundic lesions are linked to retinal atro -
phy and scarring.
These circumscribed, hyperreflective areas are known 
as gold medallion lesions and are associated with previ -
ous canine distemper infection ( Greene and Appel, 2006 ). 
Treatment is primarily symptomatic due to the lack of spe -
cific antiviral therapy. Acute optic neuritis or severe chorio-
retinitis should be treated with glucocorticoids administered 
systemically. Dry eyes should be treated with topical ciclo-
sporin and artificial tears twice daily. Corneal ulcers should 
also be treated several times a day with a topical broad-
spectrum antibacterial (Greene and Appel, 2006).
2.2 Infectious canine hepatitis
Infectious canine hepatitis (ICH) is a rarely recognized 
dog disease caused by canine adenovirus type 1 (CA V-1), 
a non-enveloped, icosahedral double-stranded DNA virus 
antigenically related to CA V-2. CA V-1 causes disease in 
wolves, coyotes, skunks, and bears, as well as encephali -
tis in foxes, but the variety of wildlife hosts is not as di -
verse as CDV . Ferrets are not affected. ICH is also known 
as Rubarth’s disease, after Carl Sven Rubarth, a veterinarian 
who described it in the late 1940s ( Sykes, 2014 ). CA V-1 
is spread through direct dog-to-dog contact or contact with 
contaminated fomites such as hands, utensils, and clothing. 
Ectoparasites like fleas and ticks can also act as mechanical 
vectors. The virus enters the body through the nose, con -
junctiva, or oropharynx and replicates within the tonsils be-
fore spreading to regional lymph nodes and the  bloodstream

290 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
via lymphatics ( Fig. 3). Following that, infection of hepa -
tocytes and endothelial cells occurs in a variety of tissues, 
including the lungs, liver, kidneys, spleen, and eye, result -
ing in hemorrhage, necrosis, and inflammation. The virus 
replicates in host cells’ nuclei, where crystalline arrays of 
virions form (Cabasso, 1962). Clinical signs usually appear 
after 4–9 days of incubation, though many dogs are likely to 
show no signs of illness. Three disease syndromes that over-
lap have been identified. The first type is an acute disease, 
which results in circulatory collapse, coma, and death af -
ter a brief illness lasting less than 24–48  h. The second and 
most commonly described syndrome is an acute disease, 
which is associated with significant morbidity and mortality 
rates ranging from 10% to 30%. Within 2 weeks, dogs with 
acute disease either recover or die. The third type is more 
chronic and occurs in dogs with partial immunity, with 
death due to hepatic failure occurring weeks (subacute dis -
ease) or months (chronic infection) after the initial infection 
(Sykes, 2014). Fever, tonsillitis, conjunctivitis, inappetence, 
lethargy, weakness, polydipsia, vomiting, hematemesis, di-
arrhea, cough, tachypnea, and icterus are all early signs of 
acute disease. Diarrhea may be accompanied by frank blood 
or melena. There are widespread petechial and ecchymotic 
hemorrhages as well as hematuria. Corneal edema (blue 
eye) (Fig. 4) occurs during the first week of illness and is 
caused by virus replication within corneal endothelial cells 
(Decaro et al., 2007).
In dogs recovering from acute illness, viral persistence 
within the renal glomeruli, uveal structures of the eye (the 
iris and ciliary body), and the cornea can trigger immune 
complex formation. In some dogs who survive, this causes 
glomerulonephritis with proteinuria, severe uveitis, and per-
sistent corneal edema. Anterior uveitis is characterized by 
an influx of inflammatory cells into the anterior chamber. 
Persistent corneal edema may persist for months and be as-
sociated with complications such as glaucoma. According to 
reports, the Afghan hound is susceptible to this complication 
(Curtis and Barnett, 1973, 1981 ). In physical examination 
performance using a slit lamp, there is significant corneal 
thickening and ciliary and episcleral injection. Uveitis 
could also be noticeable. In dogs with corneal edema, there 
have also been reports of corneal ulceration and elevated 
intraocular pressure, the latter of which can cause blindness 
(Curtis and Barnett, 1973 ). Dogs with significant corneal 
edema and uveitis should be treated with topical  ophthalmic 
FIG. 1 Direct manifestation of CD virus on ophthalmic tissue.
FIG. 2 Mucopurulent eye discharge.

Occular manifestation of infectious and noninfestious disease of dogs and cats  Chapter | 19  291
preparations that contain glucocorticoids and atropine to 
stop the development of glaucoma after fluorescein staining 
has revealed no signs of corneal ulceration.
3 Feline herpesvirus
Cats are most frequently infected with feline herpesvirus 
type 1 (FHV-1), which is a viral infection that causes ocu -
lar disease. It is a DNA virus that develops neural latency 
after primary infection and is a member of the subfamily 
α-herpesviridae. FHV-1 is known to have a site of latency 
in the trigeminal ganglion, although it can linger in ocular 
tissues, particularly the cornea, in a dormant state ( Stiles 
and Pogranichniy, 2008; Townsend et al., 2004). By virtue 
of its cytopathic effect on epithelial cells, FHV-1 causes up-
per respiratory tract disease (URTD) as well as conjuncti -
vitis or keratitis. Cats with ocular illness are likely to have 
both original infection and viral recrudescence. The most 
frequent eye conditions include keratitis with or without ul-
ceration (Fig. 5), corneal epithelial ulceration, and conjunc-
tivitis. Conjunctival hyperemia, with or without chemosis, 
lachrymation, and pain are signs of conjunctivitis. When 
there is discomfort or swelling, the nictitating membrane 
may occasionally be elevated. Corneal disease from FHV-1 
is almost always accompanied by conjunctivitis. Specific 
antiviral therapy should be used to treat conjunctivitis, 
corneal ulceration, or keratitis caused by FHV-1. Corneal 
ulcers caused only by FHV-1 should only affect the epithe-
lium. A secondary bacterial infection is likely to be pres -
ent in stromal ulcers, necessitating more strong  antibiotic 
FIG. 3 Mode of infection of ICH.
FIG. 4 Blue eye condition in dogs with raised liver enzymes (suggestive 
of ICH).
FIG. 5 Ulcerative keratitis.

292 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
therapy than would be used in the case of a viral ulcer. 
Debridement with a cotton swab should be used to remove 
away of any loose epithelium. It is not recommended to per-
form grid keratotomies on cats since this could exacerbate 
herpetic illness and cause the development of a corneal se -
questrum (La Croix et al., 2001 ). If epithelial ulceration is 
present, a broad- spectrum topical antibiotic, such as tobra -
mycin, should be used. It is important to constantly remove 
discharge and clean the eyes. Ophthalmic preparations used 
to treat feline herpesvirus type 1 infection in cats include 
cidofovir, ganciclovir, vidarabine, and the orally available 
tablet famciclovir given at 40 mg/kg. With the right medica-
tion and enough time, the prognosis for the resolution of 
FHV-1-related ocular surface illness is often fair to good, 
while some cats may experience recrudescent disease.
4 Ocular problems in canines and 
felines due to endocrine disease
The endocrine system is made up of several endocrine 
glands that are located in different parts of the animal 
body. This system is responsible for the secretion of hor -
mones that coordinate and control all the body activi -
ties. It is strictly linked to the central nervous system, as 
it diversifies its functions through the hypothalamus and 
pituitary gland ( Fabue et al., 2010 ; Kamboj et al., 2017 ). 
Endocrinopathies are manifested in a multi-organ fashion. 
Several endocrine disorders become apparent in the eye. 
Thus, the eye aids clinicians with valuable signs for the 
diagnosis and management of numerous endocrinopathies 
which can thus significantly reduce the morbidity related 
to these disorders including permanent visual dysfunction 
(Fabue et al., 2010 ). The most common endocrinopathies 
having ocular manifestations seen in small animals are 
diabetes mellitus (DM), hyperadrenocorticism (Cushing’s 
disease), hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease), growth 
hormone imbalances, hypothyroidism, hyperthyroidism 
and associated calcium imbalances ( Anoop et  al., 2020 ; 
Kamboj et al., 2017).
4.1 Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is the most common endocrine 
disorder in small animals, possibly resulting in cataract 
formation, lens-induced uveitis, endothelial cell loss and 
pleomorphism, reduced corneal sensitivity, hyperlipidemia, 
retinopathy, keratoconjunctival changes, and other reti -
nopathies (Gelatt, 1975). It may also result in uveitis and 
poor corneal wound healing. The poodle dog breed has a 
significantly excess risk than German shepherds, Cocker 
Spaniels, Collies, and Boxers for the development of diabe-
tes (Marmor et al., 1982).
A cataract is the earliest and most common ocular le -
sion in DM (lesion within 5–6  months and approximately 
80% within 16 months of its diagnosis) (Beam et al., 1999). 
Cataract may occur in diabetic cats also but less frequently 
than in dogs (young ones are highly susceptible) and the 
reason may be attributed to the fact that aldose reductase 
activity is significantly lower in older cats than in dogs 
(Richter et al., 2002 ). The avascular lens is freely perme -
able to glucose, and by the process of diffusion, it enters 
the lens from the surrounding aqueous humor. Normally 
glucose is then converted to lactic acid via the anaerobic 
glycolytic pathway and then diffuses back out of the lens to 
enter circulation. However, in DM there will be saturation 
of the hexokinase enzyme by which glucose gets metabo -
lized through the polyol pathway to sorbitol and fructose, 
which are not freely diffusible. In the presence of high glu-
cose concentration, the enzyme aldose reductase not only 
catalyzes the reduction of glucose to sorbitol, but also it is 
upregulated and thereby increasing its activity. The trapped 
sorbitol and fructose in the lens act as hydrophilic osmotic 
agents, draw more water into the lens, and cause swelling 
and rupture of lens fibers, resulting in cataracts ( Fig.  6) 
(Muirhead and Hothersall, 1995).
DM-induced cataract may lead to leakage of lens pro -
teins and subsequently result in uveitis. It will be char -
acterized by low intraocular pressure, miosis, aqueous 
flare, corneal edema, and even congestion ( Woerdt et  al., 
1992). Spontaneous cataract resorption and subsequent 
FIG. 6 Development of cataract in hyperglycemic condition.

Occular manifestation of infectious and noninfestious disease of dogs and cats  Chapter | 19  293
 lens-induced uveitis are observed primarily in young dogs, 
especially in Afghan hound, American cocker spaniel, 
Boston terrier, miniature and toy poodle, and miniature 
schnauzer (Gelatt, 1975).
Diabetic dogs in comparison with normal dogs have 
significantly reduced corneal sensitivity, due to the neu -
ropathy of the ophthalmic branch of the trigeminal nerve, 
which causes neurotrophic keratopathy, resulting in loss of 
sensory innervation to the cornea. This diffuse neuropathy 
may subsequently lead to the development of corneal ulcers 
(Kathryn et al., 2003 ). In addition, the ocular surface dis -
ease in diabetes is characterized by a disorder of tear quan-
tity and quality, squamous metaplasia, and goblet cell loss 
(Dogru et al., 2001).
Hyperlipidemia is another common symptom in dia -
betic dogs and cats. Hypertriglyceridemia occurs in rela -
tive or absolute insulin deficiency and is associated with 
decreased lipoprotein lipase activity (Feldman and Nelson, 
2004). Hypercholesteremia may also occur due to its in -
creased synthesis or impaired clearance. Hyperlipidemia 
may result in corneal lipid deposits, lipemia retinalis 
(lipid-filled retinal vessels), and lipemic aqueous humor 
(Aguiree and Gross, 1980 ). Infrequent complications like 
atherosclerotic vascular diseases are reported in dogs and 
cats also ( Hess et al., 2002 ). Atherosclerosis, when asso -
ciated with diabetes mellitus and hypothyroidism, may 
cause increased permeability of the uveal vessels and pre -
disposes the animals to the development of lipemic uveitis 
(Sottiaux, 1999).
Diabetic retinopathy is the most common ocular mani -
festation of DM and develops earlier in diabetic dogs and 
its diagnosis is often impossible due to early development 
of cataracts which limits fundus examination ( Engerman 
and Kern, 1987). Retinal hemorrhages and microaneurysms 
(RH-MA) are considered markers of diabetic retinopathy 
in dogs. Retinopathy is a common finding in hypertensive 
cats with concurrent renal failure or hyperthyroidism and 
systemic hypertension. It is frequently seen in geriatric cats 
with ocular signs of bilateral intraocular hemorrhage, reti -
nal edema and detachment, development of inner retinal 
ischemic spots (cotton-wool), and vessel tortuosity, accom-
panied by a localized or generalized narrowing of retinal 
arterioles (Boxtel, 2003).
DM may cause changes in the pre-corneal tear film due 
to poor metabolic control and peripheral neuropathy of lac-
rimal gland innervation and hence result in the development 
of dry eye or keratoconjunctivitis sicca (KCS). Acinar cells 
of the lacrimal gland need insulin to stimulate its secretory 
component and its reduction may lead to decreased tear 
production. Schirmer tear test (STT) and mean tear film 
breakup time (TFBT) values will be lowered in DM patients 
(Cullen et al., 2005 ). KCS when occurring along with re -
duced corneal sensitivity makes the cornea prone to ulcer 
formation and subsequent complications.
4.2 Hyperadenocorticism (Cushing’s disease)
Cushing’s disease or hyperadrenocorticism (HAC) may re-
sult in ophthalmic problems due to excessive levels of corti-
costeroids. There will be subsequent development of retinal 
and corneal pathologies (Chopra et al., 2012).
Retinal changes associated with systemic hypertension 
cause increased hydrostatic pressure in choroid vasculature 
resulting in hemorrhage, non-inflammatory swelling of the 
optic nerve head (papilledema), retinal detachment with 
subretinal effusions, and retinal degeneration. Hemorrhages 
may result in focal scarring of the fundus and death of the 
involved photoreceptors, leading to the formation of blind 
spots. Ocular hypertension may also cause hyphema and sub-
sequent anterior or posterior uveitis (Plummer et al., 2007).
Hyperlipidemia associated with HAC may result in lipe-
mic aqueous humor (turbid aqueous humor due to leakage 
of lipoproteins as a result of increased vascular permeabil -
ity) and subsequent inflammation which may alter –blood-
aqueous barrier. Primary hyperlipidemia in certain breeds 
of dogs like Miniature Schnauzers, Beagles, and Shetland 
Sheepdogs is due to hereditary or familial lipoprotein dys -
regulation ( Bauer, 1995; Sato et  al., 2000 ), whereas sec -
ondary hyperlipidemia is acquired due to an underlying 
disorder affecting lipid metabolism including DM, HAC, 
and hypothyroidism (Barrie et al., 1993). Lipemic aqueous 
humor along with DM increases the risk of development of 
cataracts and lens-induced uveitis.
Excess cortisol in circulation may result in immunosup-
pression and may lead to the development of endophthal -
mitis due to lesions of the posterior uvea and retina and 
occasionally the anterior uvea. In addition, excessive circu-
lating cortisol places patients at risk for ectopic calcification 
and impaired vision (Plummer et al., 2007).
Increased osteoclastic activity due to HAC may lead 
to hypercalcemia and metastatic calcification resulting in 
calcium deposits in corneal stroma or superficial cornea 
known as band keratopathy that leads to keratitis and cor -
neal opacity (Ward, 1989). Corneal degeneration may occur 
with deposition of lipids or calcium, or both in hyperlipid -
emia associated with HAC (Laus et al., 2002).
Proptosis or exophthalmia and facial nerve paralysis is 
a common ocular manifestation of Cushing’s disease and 
may result in exposure to keratitis and subsequent corneal 
ulceration (Aterman and Greenberg, 1953).
Sudden acquired retinal degeneration (SARD) is a non-
inflammatory retinal syndrome, mostly associated with 
Cushing’s syndrome, in which there is degeneration and 
loss of photoreceptors cells in the retina. It is more com -
mon in female dogs above 7 years of age dogs with SARD 
presented with acute, bilateral blindness and initially has 
normal results from a fundus examination ( Komaromy 
et  al., 2016). Acute blindness from SARD has also been 
related to diseases of the pituitary-adrenal axis ( Plummer

294 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
et al., 2007 ). Animals that are presented with SARD have 
systemic clinical signs consistent with those of Cushing’s 
syndrome (Mattson et al., 1992).
4.3 Hypoadrenocorticism (Addison’s disease)
Hypoadrenocorticism (HOC) is very rare in dogs and cats 
and may cause ocular manifestations only when associated 
with other conditions like hypercalcemia. Naturally occur -
ring HOC is an uncommon canine disease and young, fe -
male dogs are mostly affected. HOC mostly results from 
immune-mediated destruction of adrenocortical layers, 
leading to deficiencies of mineralocorticoids and glucocorti-
coids (Klein and Peterson, 2010). The ocular manifestations 
include ptosis, blepharitis, blepharospasm, keratoconjuncti-
vitis with extreme photophobia, corneal ulcers, episcleritis, 
cataract, and papilloedema (Langston, 2008).
4.4 Growth hormone disorders
Growth hormone-related issues are common in cats but 
very rare in dogs. Adenomas of the pars distalis of the pi -
tuitary gland (resulting in blindness) cause oversecretion 
of growth hormone in cats, whereas in dogs, it is reported 
to be associated with prolonged progesterone treatment 
(Eigenmann and Venker-van Haagen, 1981 ). Deficiency 
of growth hormones (resulting in secondary hypothyroid -
ism) and subsequent pituitary dwarfism are ubiquitous in 
German shepherd dogs. The ocular manifestations will be 
subsequent to hypothyroidism acromegaly from overpro -
duction of growth hormones and exophthalmos as its ocular 
manifestation is seen in German shepherd dogs ( Fracassi 
et al., 2014). Other common ophthalmic manifestations in -
clude papilledema, systemic hypertension, signs secondary 
to DM, and blindness.
4.5 Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is another common endocrinopathy in 
dogs (rare in cats). Ocular signs occur when it is associated 
with hyperlipidemia or hyperlipoproteinemia. Lipid-laden 
aqueous humor and associated uveitis are the most com -
mon ocular manifestation of hypothyroidism. Arcus lipoi -
des corneae (opaque ring of crystalline lipid deposits along 
and within the peripheral cornea near the limbus) is com -
mon in hypothyroid German shepherd dogs (Crispin, 1988). 
Hypothyroidism may result in some neurological changes 
(facial nerve paralysis and Horner’s syndrome) also due to 
segmental demyelination and axonopathy (Kern et al., 1989).
4.6 Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism is seen commonly in old cats (rare in 
dogs). In dogs, malignant neoplasm of the thyroid may 
cause  hyperthyroidism. The ocular manifestations (acute 
loss of vision, retinopathy with detachments, hyphema, sub-
retinal effusion, and hemorrhage) of hyperthyroidism in cats 
are associated with hypertension which may even go above 
160 mm of Hg (Maggio et al., 2000; Stiles et al., 1994).
4.7 Calcium disorders
Hypocalcemia can be caused by primary hypoparathyroid -
ism, renal failure, pancreatitis, eclampsia, and C-cell tu -
mors, resulting in excess secretion of calcitonin ( Delmere 
and Paterson, 1981). The characteristic ocular manifestation 
with hypocalcemia is cataract formation (because of an im-
balance with the active cation transport mechanism which 
brings osmotic imbalance and subsequent rupture of lens 
fibers) with a classic multifocal bilateral opaque appearance 
in the lens (Bassett, 1998; Evans and Kern, 1931). The pos-
sible reasons for hypercalcemia could be primary hyperpara-
thyroidism, hypercalcemia of malignancy, HOC, vitamin D 
toxicity, osteoclastic diseases, granulomatous diseases, renal 
failure, or hyperthyroidism ( Feldman and Nelson, 2004 ). 
Hypercalcemia causes metastatic calcification and the de -
velopment of band keratopathy (Aurbach, 1985).
In conclusion, several of the endocrinopathies in ani -
mals have ocular manifestations and treatment of the ocular 
signs is invariably aimed at or facilitated by treatment or 
control of the underlying cause.

Occular manifestation of infectious and noninfestious disease of dogs and cats  Chapter | 19  295

297

Chapter 20
Diseases of ear in dogs and cats
1 Introduction
The ear is a sensory organ associated with hearing and equi-
librium, therefore known as the vestibulocochlear organ. 
The ear is composed of three parts: the external, middle, 
and internal ear.
2 Anatomy of ear of dogs and cats
2.1 Anatomy of external ear
External ear is made up of three elastic cartilages—annular, 
scutiform and auricular cartilages. Annular and auricular 
cartilages form the external ear canal, and the latter expands 
to form ear pinna. Scutiform cartilage connects the ear to 
the head.
Auricle (or) ear pinna is a visible portion of ear in the 
shape of a leaf or funnel with two surfaces, two borders, 
a base, and an apex. The anterior surface is concave and 
ridged, whereas the posterior surface is convex and covered 
with hair. The two borders (medial and lateral) unite to form 
an apex. Apex is blunt, and the base is broad (Ghosh, 1998) 
(Fig. 1).
External acoustic meatus is a canal that leads to the 
middle ear with a measurement of 5–10 cm length and 
4–5 mm width ( Ghosh, 1998 ). Initially, the canal is ver -
tical, about an inch and turns horizontally. The external 
acoustic meatus is cartilaginous in nature mostly, ex -
cept the deepest part of it, which is osseous in nature. 
Histologically, the ear canal comprises sebaceous and ce -
ruminous glands (modified apocrine tubular sweat glands) 
and hair follicles. The secretions of these glands form the 
ear wax or ear cerumen, which protects the ear canal by 
resisting the movement of the foreign body and maintains 
the tympanic membrane (junction between external and 
internal ear) moist and pliable. The carriage of the auricle 
or ear pinna is breed specific in dogs and in the case of 
cats, it is upright in nature ( Ghosh, 1998).
2.2 Anatomy of middle ear
The middle ear is located in the space between the tympanic 
membrane and the internal ear. This space is called a tym -
panic cavity with an irregular and biconcave shape within 
the petrous temporal bone.
The tympanic membrane is a thin semitransparent mem-
brane that separates the external auditory canal from the 
middle ear cavity. It consists of a large part that appears 
as pars tensa, and a small triangular portion called as pars 
flaccida. The first part can be visualized under otoscopic 
examination of the middle ear is the posterior portion of 
pars tensa (Shell, 1988).
The tympanic cavity is filled with air and covers most of 
the portion of the middle ear. The tympanic bulla is a part 
of the temporal bone, where the ventral portion of the tym-
panic cavity is present. Within the cavity, there is an open -
ing to the auditory tube. The tympanic nerve passes through 
the tympanic cavity near the maleus.
Auditory tube is a short canal connecting the nasophar -
ynx to the middle ear, and it helps to maintain atmospheric 
pressure in the middle ear by its connection with the phar -
ynx, due to which throat infection ascends to the middle ear 
(Ghosh, 1998).
Auditory ossicles include very small bones and are mal-
leus, incus, and stapes. They are arranged in a chain to con-
nect the tympanic membrane with an oval window of the 
internal ear. These bones attach to the tympanic wall by inter-
osseous ligaments. Vibrations of air that strike the tympanic 
membrane are amplified and transmitted across the middle 
ear cavity to the inner ear auditory receptors by the ossicles. 
Maleus is a hammer-shaped bone and its head articulates 
with incus. Whereas the incus is anvil shaped with its head ar-
ticulating with malleus and long process articulates with the 
head of the stapes with the help of the lenticular process. The 
stapes are stirrup-shaped, the head articulates with the long 
process of incus, and the base is fitted to an oval window. 
All these bones articulate together with the help of ligaments.

298 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
2.3 Anatomy of internal ear
It is the ear’s main portion called an organ of hearing and 
is situated within the petrous temporal bone, consists of 
a bony labyrinth that accommodates the membranous 
labyrinth. The space between two labyrinths is filled with 
perilymph (Resembles CSF). A bony labyrinth comprises 
vestibule, cochlea, and semicircular canals.
Vestibule is situated medial to the tympanic cavity 
and the cavity of vestibule lodges the utricle and saccule 
of membranous labyrinth. Cochlea has the appearance of 
the shell of a snail. Extract the basilar membrane from the 
edge of the lamina to the outer wall of the canal and di -
vide the canal into scala vestibule and scala tympani. These 
two scalae are continuous at the apex of the cochlea termed 
Helicotrema ( Ghosh, 1998 ). Semicircular canals are 3 in 
number, i.e., superior or anterior, posterior and lateral, and 
these canals are at right angles to each other ( Shell, 1988). 
Terminal parts of these tubes at the junctions with vestibule 
dilate to form the ampullae (Fig. 2).
Membranous labyrinth consists of the cochlear duct, 
saccule and utricle, 3 ducts of the semicircular canals. The 
membranous labyrinth cavity is filled with endolymph and 
compared to the saccule utricle is more prominent in size. 
The spiral tubes contain endolymph and the organ of corti 
is the organ of hearing.
Organ of corti is situated on the basilar membrane and 
contains hair cells, a tunnel of corti, a tectorial membrane, 
and a spiral ganglion. Hair cells are present on the basilar 
membrane in an outer and inner row. The tectorial mem -
brane is attached to the outer border of the spiral lamina. It 
is made of a gelatinous substance and overhangs hair cells. 
Spiral ganglions are situated on the bony spiral lamina. The 
axons of these spiral ganglionic nerve cells constitute the 
cochlear division of the auditory nerve. Vibrations received 
at the oval window are transmitted to the perilymph in the 
scala vestibule, causing fluid waves to occur in the endo -
lymph of the cochlear duct. As a result, the basilar mem -
brane moves, stimulating the hair cells of the organ of Corti 
and triggering an impulse in the cochlear portion of the 
eighth cranial nerve (Shell, 1988) (Fig. 3).
3 Diseases of external ear
3.1 Otitis externa
In general, inflammation of the ear is known as otitis and in 
specific, inflammation of the external ear is known as Otitis 
externa. Otitis externa is one of the chief complaints raised 
by pet owners to veterinarians due to multifactorial etiology.
Prevalence rate of Otitis externa in case of dogs is 
5%–20%, and in cats is 2%, low due to the upright na -
FIG. 1 Cartilages of the right external ear of dog.

Diseases of ear in dogs and cats  Chapter | 20  299
ture of the auricle and the absence of hair in the ear canal 
that enhances ventilation and drainage ( August, 1988 ). 
Breed wise incidence of otitis externa in dogs is re -
ported to be common among Cocker spaniels, Miniature 
poodles, Fox terriers, and Beagles and are at high risk. 
Among the cat breeds, Himalayan and Persians are at 
high risk ( Sparber et al., 2020 ). With respect to age wise, 
dogs aged 5 and 8  years are highly susceptible ( Grono 
and Frost, 1969 ) due to hypersensitivity diseases and 
disorders of keratinization. Cats between 1 and 2  years 
are highly susceptible due to early exposure and sensi -
tization to an ear mite, Otodetus cyanosis  (Orcutt et al., 
2011) (Table 1).
3.1.1 Primary factors
Parasites
External parasites associated in causing Otitis externa are ear 
mites like Otodectus cynotis, Sarcoptes scabei, Demodex ca-
nis, Demodex cati, Notoedres cati, Eutrombicula alfreddugesi 
FIG. 2 Schematic view of the tympanic membrane, middle ear, ossicles, and inner ear structures of dogs and cats.
FIG. 3 Anatomy of inner ear of dogs and cats.

300 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
and ear tick Otobius megnini (larval stage). Among these, the 
most commonly noticed parasites are Otodectus cynotis, an 
ear mite, and O. megnini, a spinose ear tick of dogs and cats 
play important role in causing otitis externa (Fig. 4).
Foreign bodies
Foreign bodies such as plant awns (Fox tail) and dirt are 
generally noticed on the ear after playing in a garden or 
open lands. Other foreign materials such as dried otic medi-
cations, dead insects and broken hairs that can be visualized 
under otoscopic examination.
Hypersensitivity diseases
The major cause of hypersensitivity disease in dogs and cats 
is atopic dermatitis and food allergy. It is reported that 55% 
of dogs with atopic dermatitis have concurrent otitis externa 
with 3%–5% ( Griffin et al., 2001 ), and 80% of dogs with 
food allergy have concurrent infections of otitis externa 
with 25% (Rosser, 2004). A less frequent cause of otitis ex-
terna is due to allergic contact dermatitis (ACD).
Disorders of keratinization
Keratinization defects could be due to endocrine dis -
orders like hypothyroidism, hyperadrenocorticism and 
sex- hormone imbalance; epithelialization disorders like se-
baceous adenitis, zinc-responsive dermatitis; glandular dis-
order like sebaceous gland hyperplasia. All these disorders 
may change the keratinization and cerumin production in 
the external ear canal leading to otitis externa ( Rosenfeld 
et al., 2014).
Auto immune diseases
Diseases like systemic lupus erythematosus, pemphigus 
vulgaris, pemphigus foliaceous, mucous membrane pem -
TABLE 1 Various factors causing otitis externa in dogs 
and cats (August, 1988; Rosser, 2004; Ettinger et al., 2016).
S. no. Factors associated with otitis externa
1 Primary Factors—They directly induce otitis externa 
in dogs and cats
• Parasites
• Foreign bodies
• Hypersensitivity diseases
• Disorders of keratinization
• Autoimmune diseases
2 Predisposing Factors—These factors place dogs and 
cats at high risk.
• Ear canal maceration
• Treatment errors
• Obstructive ear disease
• Anal sac diseases
• Pyrexia
• Systemic diseases
3 Perpetuating Factors—These factors are responsible 
for chronic otitis externa among cats and dogs.
• Bacteria
• Yeasts
• Otitis media
• Progressive pathologic changes
FIG. 4 Schematic figure depicting different factors associated with otitis externa.

Diseases of ear in dogs and cats  Chapter | 20  301
phigoid, and cutaneous vasculitis cause otitis externa and 
skin lesions at other areas of the body.
3.1.2 Predisposing factors
Ear canal maceration
Usually, the ear canal of a dog has high relative humidity 
(August, 1988). If there is frequent wetting of the ear canal 
due to bathing or swimming increases the moisture in the 
ear canal which stimulates the activity of the ceruminous 
gland and secretes cerumin favoring the growth of microbes 
and leads to maceration of the ear canal.
Treatment errors
Improper use of antimicrobial preparations causes the 
proliferation of bacteria, e.g., Proteus mirabilis , and 
Pseudomonas aeruginosa  ( August, 1988 ). Also disuse of 
ear cleansing solutions causes irritation and maceration of 
the ear canal (Ghosh, 1998).
Obstructive ear disease
Decrease in the lumen of the ear canal due to inflamma -
tory polyps, tumors, congenital atresia cause obstruction in 
the ear canal and accumulation of cerumen in the ear canal 
which changes the ear environment and causes otitis externa.
Contribution of other predisposing factors like anal sac 
disease, pyrexia, systemic diseases leads to otitis externa in 
dogs and cats.
3.1.3 Perpetuating factors
Bacteria
Common commensals of the canine ear are Staphylococcus 
intermedius, micrococcus spp., and Coliforms occasionally, 
whereas the normal feline ear has Staphylococcus intermedius 
and Pasteurella multocida (Dickson and Love, 1983; McCarthy 
et al., 2009). These bacteria quickly colonize the ear canal when 
there is a change in the microenvironment of ear canal.
Yeast
The most commonly noticed fungal pathogen is Malassezia 
spp. and occasionally Candida spp., Aspergillus spp., 
Microsporum spp. and Trichophyton spp., Sporothrix 
schenki and paecilomyces spp. (Scott and Horn, 1987).
Otitis media
Inflammation of the middle ear is known as otitis media. It 
occurs due to extension of otitis externa, infection ascend -
ing to the eustachian tube, hematogenous route, tympanic 
rupture, tumors, and any foreign body in the external ear 
canal.
Progressive pathologic changes
In case of chronic ear canal inflammation, as the inflamma-
tion persists and results in epidermal hyperplasia, dermal 
hyperplasia, atrophy of sebaceous glands, and enlargement 
accompanied by inflammatory exudate ( Fig.  4). Due to 
severe inflammation, there will be a change in the micro -
climate of the ear which favors microbial growth and prolif-
eration which further enhances the inflammation and tissue 
changes.
3.1.4 Clinical presentations (or) different 
phases of Otitis externa (Ettinger et al., 2016)
S. no.
Phases of 
otitis Clinical signs
1 Acute phase Clinical signs are noted for less 
than 7 days
2 Subacute phase Clinical signs are noticed for 
more than 7 days but less than 
30 days
3 Chronic phase Clinical signs is noticed for more 
than 30 days
4 Recurrent 
phase
Clinical signs are cured on proper 
treatment but again reappear
5 Erythematous 
phase
Ear canal inflammation typically 
showing signs of severe pruritis 
and head shaking
6 Erythemato-
ceruminous 
phase
Inflammation of the ear canal 
followed by excessive cerumen 
production obstructing the ear 
canal
7 Suppurative 
phase
Due to changes in the 
microenvironment of the ear 
canal which favors the growth 
of bacteria and secretions are 
notifiable with unpleasant in odor 
and more painful
8 Stenotic phase Extensive epidermal hyperplasia 
of the ear canal reduces the 
diameter of the ear canal that 
leads to obstruction of the 
external ear mainly noticed in 
chronic cases
See Fig. 5.
3.1.5 Diagnosis
As multifactorial agents cause the disease, a detailed his -
tory is necessary for early diagnosis. In diagnosing Otitis 
externa, following step wise procedural examination and 
tests are recommended.
First step is examination from short distance. This 
helps diagnose the type of otitis externa. On close exami -
nation of the ear canal if it is pain on palpation and pus is 
noticed, it is suppurative otitis externa and if there is ex -
cessive cerumin production it is erythematous ceruminous 
otitis externa.

302 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
Second step is direct cerumen examination under low-
power magnification helps to detect ear mites or parasites in 
the ear canal and further cytologic examination and cultural 
examination which have greater diagnostic information re -
garding bacteria, fungi, yeast, neoplastic cells etc. helps to 
diagnose the type of microorganism causing otitis externa.
Cytologic examination procedure is easy to perform. 
Collect the otic exudate through ear swabs at the junction of 
the vertical and horizontal ear canal, then roll it on a glass 
slide and air dry it. Go with the appropriate staining pro -
cedures like Romanowsky stain, Lactophenol cotton blue 
stain, etc. by which different types of microorganisms under 
high power magnification can be appreciated.
Third step involves otoscopic examination and is used to 
evaluate the external ear canal and it helps in the identifica-
tion of otitis externa and otitis media. If any discomfort to 
an animal is noticed go with sedation. It is useful in diag -
nosing the ear canal for any ulcers, foreign bodies, tumors, 
the appearance of the tympanic membrane, polyps, etc.
Fourth step is dermatological examination in order to di-
agnose for any underlying skin diseases like scabies, ACD, 
atopic dermatitis, and food allergy dermatitis that are af -
fecting the external ear and further leading to otitis externa.
3.1.6 Treatment
Many cases of otitis externa are difficult to diagnose, espe-
cially when the condition is chronic and require more labo-
ratory test which is time-consuming. The main aim should 
be toward resolving primary causes, relieving inflamma -
tion, and removing microbial agents (Shell, 1988).
While treating the Otitis externa, the following proce -
dures and medications are indicated.
Cleaning of ear
It is basic and most important as it helps to diagnose any 
foreign body or tumor in the ear canal. Ear cleaning must 
be done twice or thrice a week. Pour ear cleansing liquid 
into the ear canal and massage the ear for 30 to 60  s which 
allows the pet to shake its head and then, clean the discharge 
oozing out from the ear canal with a cotton swab. A wide 
variety of ear cleaning agents are available in the market 
with different actions on the ear canal like surfactants, ceru-
minolytic agents, etc.
Local therapy with Acaricides
Otoacariasis is an infestation of the ear canal with ticks and 
mites most commonly seen in dogs and cats. Direct exami-
nation of cerumen under low power magnification is helpful 
in identifying ticks and mites. Use of acaricidal agents like 
Benzyl benzoate or Lindane (Chakrabarti, 2007) should be 
applied twice a week as the eggs of these mites will not de-
stroy easily. These mites not only survive in the ear but also 
in other parts of the body, especially in the lumbar region 
so it is advised to use Amitraz twice a week as an external 
application.
Topical antibacterial therapy
It is more effective rather than systemic therapy as bacteria 
present in cerumen and pus in the ear canal easily react with 
the topical antibiotic. The cytological examination needs to 
be done to identify the microorganism, whether it is rods 
or cocci and give appropriate antibiotics. For specific treat-
ment go with antibiotic sensitivity testing.
Topical antifungals therapy
Antifungal agents like Nystatin effectively works 
against Candida spp. infection and azole antifungals like 
Thiabendazole, Clotrimazole, Miconazole, Ketoconazole, 
Itraconazole, and Fluconazole will destruct the cell wall of 
microorganisms. Among these, Ketoconazole works against 
canine malassezia and Itraconazole for feline malassezia.
Corticosteroid therapy
It is especially indicated in chronic otitis externa cases. It 
helps to decrease the cerumen secretion, and reduce pain, 
pruritis and inflammatory swelling. In chronic cases, ste -
notic ears require Prednisone @ 2  mg/kg/day for 2  weeks. 
Dogs suffering from allergic otitis require topical otic corti-
costeroid, dimathyl sulfoxide (DMSO) @ 2 to 5 drops twice 
daily until the inflammation is controlled ( Lorenz et  al., 
2005).
Treatment of underlying skin diseases
Treat the skin diseases like scabies, atopic dermatitis, ACD 
with appropriate drugs that should not perpetuate to otitis 
externa. Recent studies say that some essential oils like 
Origanum vulgare, Salvia sclarea, etc., are used as alterna-
tive therapeutic agents and conventional drugs in bacterial 
otitis (Ebani et al., 2017). Contraindications are mandatory 
FIG. 5 Dog with otitis externa showing inflammatory exudates charac -
terized by enlarged ear with epidermal and dermal hyperplasia.

Diseases of ear in dogs and cats  Chapter | 20  303
in case of otitis as it may lead to ototoxicosis. Hence, ami -
noglycosides, chloramphenicol should not be used in case 
of a ruptured tympanic membrane.
Maintenance care
Application of medication must be carefully carried out 
and given adequate knowledge regarding otitis to owners. 
Advise the owners not to discontinue the treatment when 
the ear looks better before the infection gets resolved. 
Preventing water from entering the ear canal during swim -
ming or bathing will minimize maceration. Clipping of hair 
on the concave side of the ear pinna would decreases the 
humidity and increases ventilation to the ear canal.
3.2 Aural hematoma
Aural hematomas are subcutaneous fluctuating inflamma -
tions filled with hemorrhagic fluid due to traumatic rupture 
of capillaries that affect the ear pinna’s concave surface in 
dogs and cats ( Hewitt and Bajwa, 2020 ). It is a common 
condition in dogs with pendulous ears like Basset hound, 
Afghan hound, Cocker spaniel, Dachshund, Great Dane, 
etc.
In this condition, blood and serum accumulate in be -
tween the conchal cartilage and the skin of the ear ( Fig. 6). 
It is caused due to trauma, itching due to allergy, rupture 
of blood vessels within pinna due to repeated shaking of 
head, mites like Otodectes cyanotis  (50%) ( Hnilica and 
Patterson, 2016 ), Sarcoptes scabiei , lice infestation and 
auto immune disease of pinnal tissues. Clinical manifesta -
tions are mainly characterized by repeated shaking of head 
and rubbing of the ears, swelling either in inner or outer 
surface of the ear, ear appears as fluctuating, tendered on 
pressure. Pain on palpation, head is kept lowered at the af -
fected side. In chronic cases, the lesions become firm and 
fibrotic. Diagnosis can be done through aspiration at the af-
fected ear and will reveals the oozing of blood and serum. 
Treatment includes, if it is a mild cases we can go with hep-
arin, low anti-inflammatory dosage of oral glucocorticoids 
can be added ( Chakrabarti, 2007). Surgical intervention is 
required for draining out the accumulated blood and clo -
sure with mattress suture. Further checking for the presence 
of any underlying causes is needed in order to prevent the 
reoccurrence.
4 Disease of middle ear (or) otitis 
media
Inflammation of middle ear is called as otitis media. It is 
a most common disease that goes unnoticeably in veteri -
nary practice. The occurrence of this disease is 16% in 
acute otitis externa and 50%–80% in chronic otitis externa 
(Cole et al., 2006 ; Classen et al., 2016 ). It is a multifac -
torial disease includes infectious, allergic, environmental 
factors, etc.
4.1 Risk factors
4.1.1 Infectious causes
Infectious causes include bacteria like Streptococcus, 
Staphylococcus, E. coli, Pseudomonas, Proteus, Clostridium 
species, etc. Most common bacteria causing otitis media 
include is Streptococcus pneumonia, Haemophilus influ -
enza, Moraxella catarrahalis (Fraser, 1965; Denny, 1973). 
Among the Yeast, Malassezia canis and Candida spp. are 
common causes. Parasites causing Otocariasis in dogs and 
cats is otodectes cyanotis, and it causes rupture of tympanic 
membrane (Shell, 1988). Among fungal gents Aspergillus 
spp. infection is common.
4.1.2 Allergic causes
Primary factors are food hypersensitivity, canine atopic der-
matitis, and contact allergic reactions. Secondary factors in-
clude bacterial, yeast infections, and hyperplastic changes. 
Others include environmental factors (moisture, wet con -
ditions), foreign bodies, any trauma to ear, and metabolic 
diseases that decrease immunity, genetic predisposition, 
deficiency diseases, etc. can predispose to otitis media. The 
major route of infection is across the tympanic membrane 
where hair, foreign bodies, debris and exudate associated 
with external ear canal disease can cause inflammation, ne-
crosis, and rupture of the tympanic membrane and rarely by 
FIG. 6 Dog with aural hematoma showing accumulation of inflamma -
tory fluid in between the conchal cartilage and the skin of the ear.

304 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
hematogenous route and through the auditory tube ( Shell, 
1988). As discussed in otitis externa similar way, all the 
above factors cause the damage to middle ear and alter the 
microenvironment of the middle ear. Cats may develop oti-
tis media through the auditory tube as a sequel to upper re -
spiratory disease.
4.2 Clinical signs
Clinical signs are characterized by mild discomfort, pain, 
ottorrhea, head tilt toward the affected side, purulent dis -
charges from the external ear, mild pruritus, frequent 
shaking of head, scratching of ears, and will have hearing 
defects.
As the facial, sympathetic, and parasympathetic nerves 
line near the middle ear leads to facial nerve paralysis, 
Horner’s syndrome, and Keratoconjunctivitis sicca, respec-
tively of the ipsilateral side of affected ear (Chrisman et al., 
1999).
4.3 Diagnosis
4.3.1 Palpation
Careful palpation at the base of ear and temporomandibu -
lar joint region for any swelling and pain should be done. 
Examine the pharyngeal area for any inflammation, foreign 
body that may have spread to the middle ear via the audi -
tory tube ( Chrisman et al., 1999 ). The veterinarian should 
look for signs of head shaking, pawing at the ear, pain on 
opening mouth, signs of otitis externa, head tilt, facial nerve 
paralysis signs, Horner’s syndrome, ataxia. The signs of fa-
cial nerve paralysis, Horner’s syndrome, would distinguish 
otitis media from simple otitis externa.
4.3.2 Ear examination
For complete examination of the ear under the otoscope, a 
deep ear cleaning is required. For thorough examination of 
the ear, and to keep the animal comfort, heavy sedation (or) 
general anesthesia is necessary in most cases. If the ear is 
normal, we can visualize the tympanic membrane and ex -
ternal ear canal. The presence of debris, masses, ulceration, 
hyperplasia, (or) hyperkeratosis of the surrounding tissues 
may disturb the visualization of the tympanic membrane 
(Shell, 1988). By lavaging, the ear canal with normal saline 
removes the debris. In case of tympanic membrane rupture, 
antiseptic agents should not be used; even in dilute solu -
tions, it causes irreversible inner ear damage.
4.3.3 Cultural examination
Collect the samples of the material in the ear using cotton 
swabs, and culture the samples to identify the causative 
agent, conduct the antibiotic sensitivity test, and advise the 
correct antibiotic.
4.3.4 Myringotomy
This involves surgical incision into the ear drum (tympanic 
membrane), to relieve pain, and pressure and drain fluid. 
It is performed if the tympanic membrane is intact but dis -
colored and bulging. It is also performed for the purpose 
of obtaining samples for cytology and culture, and to drain 
fluid from the middle ear cavity. It is also used for treatment 
purposes in order to relieve pressure and pain caused by 
the fluid or inflammatory material within the middle ear. 
Myringotomy creates a small hole in the tympanic mem -
brane that heals rapidly if otitis media resolves ( Parker 
et  al., 2017 ). Most commonly used procedure is simple 
paracentesis, wherein, a blunt probe is inserted through the 
otoscope cone to perforate the tympanic membrane, and af-
ter perforation, 20 gauge needle is inserted into the perfo -
rated membrane and contents will be aspirated (Harvey and 
Ter Haar, 2016).
4.3.5 Radiographs
Radiographs may be helpful in the evaluation of otitis 
media. On a radiograph, we can detect any changes like 
thickening, and destruction to the structures of the ear. For 
obtaining quality radiographs ventro dorsal, oblique lateral 
views are needed. As many cases of otitis media are a se -
quela to chronic otitis externa, there will be a narrowing of 
the external ear canal which can be visualized under ven -
tro dorsal skull view ( Wiegand et al., 2019). In the case of 
chronic otitis media, thickened wall of the tympanic bulla 
is noticed. Even if the radiographs appear normal, that does 
not mean that your pet does not have otitis media because 
radiographic changes may not be visualized under X-rays 
for several weeks in acute cases of otitis media ( Shell, 
1988).
4.3.6 Advanced imaging
By computed tomography (CT) and magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), further evaluation of the tympanic bulla can 
be possible. CT is usually better in detecting bony changes, 
while MRI is better for detecting soft tissue abnormalities.
4.4 Treatment
It is done to remove inflammatory, infected or foreign ma -
terial from the bulla and to provide ventilation and drain -
age. Treatment is done by medical or surgical procedure or 
both depending upon the chronicity of disease. Primarily 
cleaning of the both external and middle ear canal is im -
portant. Debris can inactivate some topical medications and 
preventive medications from contacting infected tissues. 
Anesthesia is required to clean the deep ear canal, so that 
ear flushing will remove the debris. Use topical medication 
of antimicrobial drugs and corticosteroids directly to the 
affected area, after clearing the debris. Systemic  antibiotic

Diseases of ear in dogs and cats  Chapter | 20  305
therapy is also recommended. Based on culture and sen -
sitivity testing, specific antibiotic therapy is employed. 
Long-term use of aminoglycosides is avoided because of 
their toxicity effect. If culture is not obtained, broad spec -
trum antibiotics, such as Chloramphenicol, Cephalosporins, 
or Trimethoprim-sulfa are recommended. If no improve -
ment is seen in medical treatment, then opt for the surgical 
management.
In cases where exudate of the middle ear is noticed on 
otoscopy, a myringotomy may be performed and the middle 
ear cavity has to be irrigated with a warm saline solution af-
ter collection of samples. Certain ototoxic agents like ami -
noglycosides (gentamicin, neomycin), chloramphenicol, 
iodine, iodophor, cetrimide, chlorhexidine should not be used 
in case of the ruptured or perforated tympanic membrane. 
Complication of chronic otitis media is cholesteatoma, an 
epidermoid cyst caused by migration of stratified squamous 
epithelium from the externa ear canal to the affected middle 
ear through ruptured tympanic membrane ( Coyner, 2019). 
There is no specific treatment for facial nerve paralysis, 
Horner’s syndrome, and Keratoconjunctivitis sicca.
5 Disease of inner ear (or) otitis interna
Inflammation of the inner ear is called Otitis interna, and 
veterinary practitioners rarely notice this condition. It is as-
sumed that same organism causing otitis externa and media 
affects the internal ear. Almost half of the dogs showing 
peripheral vestibular syndrome is caused by otitis interna 
(Orlandi et al., 2020 ). The prolonged state of otitis media 
with no clinical significance will affect the internal ear. 
Inflammation of this internal ear impairs the 8th cranial 
nerve, loss of hearing ability and shows the signs of periph-
eral vestibular syndrome like head tilt, circling, falling to -
wards the affected side etc. (Orlandi et al., 2020). Diagnosis 
is not so simple in this conditions, where advanced diag -
nostic imaging techniques will be helpful in confirma -
tion. Employ systemic and topical antibiotic therapy with 
Cephalosporins, Chloramphenicol, etc., for 3 to 6 weeks. If 
the disease is caused by otitis externa or otitis media, go with 
the treatment as discussed above. The prognosis of disease 
is favorable if it is identified and treated earlier. Otherwise, 
in some cases, infection enters the brain stem and causes 
the brain stem abscess and meningitis (Barrs et al., 2007).
6 Deafness
Deafness is defined as the absence of perception of sound. 
It may be congenital or acquired as a result of infection, 
trauma, or degeneration of the cochlea. Deafness may be 
unilateral or bilateral. The most common cause of deafness 
is the hereditary type, usually associated with white pig -
mentation. This condition develops within 1–3  weeks after 
birth, secondary to stria vascularis degeneration.
Most hereditary deafness in dogs is pigment-associated, 
of the cochlea-saccular pathology type, and is specifically 
associated with either the recessive alleles of the piebald 
gene (S) or the dominant allele of the merle (M) gene. 
White pigmentation is specifically associated with either 
the recessive alleles of the piebald gene (S) or the dominant 
allele of the merle (M) gene. The piebald and merle genes 
suppress melanocytes, producing white or dilution of pig -
mentation in skin and hair, blue irises in some dogs, and 
disrupted function in the stria vascularis, resulting in deaf -
ness (Strain, 2012).
Other types of deafness include sensorineural (nerve) 
deafness and is caused due to loss of cochlear hair cells 
leading to loss of auditory function. Another is conduc -
tive deafness and is due to blockage of sound transmission 
through the external or middle ear. In case of conductive 
deafness, there will not be any cochlea damage.
6.1 Causes of deafness
Geriatric animals develop presbycusis (age-related hear -
ing loss) which is progressive with time and cannot be 
prevented or reversed. Ototoxicity results from administer-
ing a drug or chemical that directly or indirectly destroys 
cochlear hair cells, resulting in hearing loss or even total 
deafness. The most common cause of ototoxicity is due to 
the administration of aminoglycoside antibiotics, such as 
Gentamicin, Kanamycin, Neomycin, Tobramycin, and oth-
ers. Otitis of the middle ear or inner ear can produce tran -
sient or permanent deafness. Noise-induced hearing loss 
(NIHL) is caused primarily by loss of hair cells due to me -
chanical trauma, and extreme sounds can also damage the 
tympanum. NIHL is based on sound intensity and duration 
of exposure. Hearing loss can be vary depending on any 
of the above causes, and it may be unilateral or bilateral 
(Kent et  al., 2010 ). Unilaterally deaf animals show signs 
like inability to localize sound origins and generally orient 
toward the good ear. Bilaterally deaf animals do not respond 
to sound stimuli and are adapted to increased attention to 
other senses such as vision and vibration.
6.2 Diagnosis
Deafness is detected by brainstem auditory evoked response 
(BAER), also known as brainstem auditory evoked potential 
(BAEP). It detects electrical activity in the cochlea and au -
ditory pathways in the brain similar to electro cardio gram 
(ECG) which detects electrical activity of the heart. Each 
ear is tested individually, and the duration of test ranges 
from 10 to 15  min. Anesthesia may not be required unless 
the dog becomes extremely agitated. Small electrodes are 
placed under the skin of the scalp: one in front of each ear, 
one at the top of the head, and one between the shoulders. 
The response will be in the form of a wave consisting of a

306 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
series of peaks. First peak or Peak I is produced by the co -
chlear nerve, and later peaks are produced within the brain. 
The response from deaf ear is a flat line. Deafness is also 
diagnosed by Otoscopic examination of the external ear and 
tympanum and also by radiography of the tympanic bullae.
6.3 Therapy
Based on the type of deafness, we need to go with appropri-
ate therapy. Early intervention in ototoxicity may reduce or 
reverse loss but usually is not successful. Once developed, 
sensorineural deafness cannot be reversed, and its cause 
cannot be determined.
If the deafness is congenital, there is no specific treat -
ment to reverse the damage. However, such pets can be 
maintained by giving perfect training. Based on the interest 
of the owner, hearing aids can be used in pets as in humans. 
If it is conductive deafness caused due to more accumula -
tion of cerumen or any foreign body, go with appropriate 
therapy to regain the hearing capability. In case of inflam -
matory and infectious diseases, anti-inflammatory drugs 
and antimicrobials are indicated, whereas dogs with tumor 
in external ear need chemotherapy or radiation therapy 
(Ettinger et al., 2016).
7 Aural neoplasia
Neoplastic and non-neoplastic diseases of ear canal, form -
ing mass lesions in the dog and cat are similar in normal 
character and histology. However, the incidence of aural 
neoplasia is low in animal practice ( Gotthelf, 2004 ). The 
observation of a mass is a common clinical sign of aural 
neoplasia, however, an associated discharge is seen and 
consistent with otitis externa or media. Nervous signs such 
as facial paralysis, and vestibular abnormalities may be 
seen and may be differentially diagnosed of tumor invasion. 
Most of the malignant tumors local invasion is common and 
the frequency of the metastasis is less, however, in the case 
of cats during initial diagnosis, 5%–15% have reported the 
metastasis to regional lymph nodes and lungs ( MacEwen 
and Reviews, 1990).
The incidence of benign ear tumors in dogs is about 
40% of ear neoplasms, including ceruminous gland ad -
enoma, sebaceous gland adenoma, basal cell tumors, his -
tiocytomas, papillomas and fibromas, inflammatory polyps, 
and others (Berzon and Bunch, 1980; Pratschke, 2003; Fan 
and de Lorimier, 2004 ). Malignant tumors include squa -
mous cell carcinoma, carcinoma of undetermined origin, 
sebaceous cell carcinoma, and mesenchymal tumors such 
as melanomas, soft-tissue sarcomas, and hemangiopericy -
toma. Malignant neoplasms are more common than benign 
tumors in canine ear. Surgical resection is the best treat -
ment for malignant neoplasms involving the ear canal. The 
commonly noticed benign ear neoplasms in cats are ceru -
minous gland origin, while other tumor types are similar to 
dogs. Benign tumors originating in the cat’s pinna include 
basal cell epithelioma, rhabdomyoma, and hemangioma 
(Fan and de Lorimier, 2004). Other tumors like carcinoma, 
melanoma, and mast cell tumors may have benign charac -
teristics. In cats, 80% of tumors of the ear are malignant 
(London et al., 1996).

Diseases of ear in dogs and cats  Chapter | 20  307

309

Chapter 21
Overview on diseases of blood and 
hematopoietic system in dogs and cats
Blood cells form and develop mostly in the bone marrow, 
that is, the tissue located in the cavities of bones. Blood 
performs a variety of important functions as it circulates 
throughout the body. It delivers oxygen and vital nutrients 
(such as vitamins, minerals, fats, and sugars) to the tis -
sues. It carries carbon dioxide to the lungs to be exhaled 
and waste products to the kidneys and liver to be eliminated 
from the body. It transports hormones, which are chemi -
cal messengers, to various parts of the body, allowing those 
parts to communicate with each other. Blood also includes 
cells that fight infection and control bleeding.
There are three cellular elements of blood: red blood 
cells, white blood cells, and platelets. Basically, red blood 
cells supply the body with oxygen, white blood cells pro-
tect against infection, and platelets start the formation of 
blood clots.
1 Hematopoietic system in animals
Blood supplies cells with water, electrolytes, nutrients, 
and hormones and removes waste products. The cellular 
elements supply oxygen ( RBCs), protect against foreign 
organisms and antigens ( WBCs), and initiate coagulation 
(platelets). Because of the diversity of the hematopoietic 
system, its diseases are best discussed from a functional 
perspective. The function may be classified as either normal 
responses to abnormal situations (e.g., leukocytosis and left 
shift in response to inflammation) or primary abnormali -
ties of the hematopoietic system (e.g., pancytopenia from 
marrow failure). Furthermore, abnormalities may be quan -
titative (i.e., too many or too few cells) or qualitative (i.e., 
abnormalities in function) (Cotter, 2022a,b,c,d).
The hematopoietic system includes the formed elements 
of the blood as well as the bone marrow, spleen, lymph 
nodes, and reticuloendothelial tissue. It is uniquely con -
structed to provide the body with a vast capacity for cell 
renewal. To balance the loss of mature cells and to provide 
for rapid expansion in response to bodily insults, cellular 
renewal must be maintained throughout life. The relative 
accessibility of the blood and bone marrow creates the po -
tential for providing early clues to the effects of toxic expo-
sure. A wide range of hematological disorders may follow 
exposure to such environmental agents as solvents, heavy 
metals, insecticides, nitrates, nitrites, and ionizing radiation 
(Tsongas, 1985; Smith, 1986).
2 Red blood cells in animals
The function of RBCs is to carry oxygen to the tissues at 
pressures sufficient to permit its rapid diffusion. This is ac-
complished through the following mechanisms: a carrier 
molecule, hemoglobin (Hgb); a vehicle (RBC) capable of 
bringing the intact Hgb to the cellular level; and a metab -
olism geared to protect both the RBC and the Hgb from 
damage. Interference with synthesis or release of Hgb, pro-
duction or survival of RBCs, or metabolism causes disease. 
Erythropoiesis is regulated by erythropoietin, which in -
creases in the presence of hypoxia and regulates RBC pro -
duction. In most species, the kidney is both the sensor organ 
and the major site of erythropoietin production, so chronic 
renal failure is associated with anemia. Erythropoietin acts 
on the marrow in concert with other humoral mediators to 
increase the number of stem cells entering RBC production, 
to shorten maturation time, and to cause early release of 
reticulocytes. Other factors that affect erythropoiesis are the 
supply of nutrients (e.g., iron, folate, or vitamin B 12) and 
cell-cell interactions between erythroid precursors, lym -
phoid cells, and other components of the hematopoietic mi-
croenvironment. Factors that may suppress erythropoiesis 
include chronic debilitating diseases and endocrine disor -
ders (Cotter, 2022a,b,c,d).
The principal metabolic pathway of RBC is glycoly -
sis, and the main energy source in most species is glucose. 
Glucose enters the RBC by an insulin-independent mecha -
nism, and most are metabolized to produce ATP and reduced 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NADH). The energy of

310 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
ATP is used to maintain RBC membrane pumps so as to 
preserve shape and flexibility. The reducing potential of the 
NADH is utilized via the methemoglobin reductase path -
way to maintain the iron in Hgb in its reduced form (Fe2+).
The glucose not used in glycolysis is metabolized via a 
second pathway, the hexose monophosphate (HMP) shunt. 
No energy is produced via the HMP shunt; its principal ef -
fect is to maintain reducing potential in the form of reduced 
nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide phosphate (NADPH). In 
conjunction with the glutathione reductase/peroxidase sys -
tem, NADPH maintains the sulfhydryl groups of globin in 
their reduced state.
Some disorders are the direct result of abnormal RBC 
metabolism and interference with glycolysis. Inherited defi-
ciency of pyruvate kinase, a key glycolytic enzyme, causes 
ATP deficiency, which leads to reduced RBC lifespan and 
hemolytic anemia. Excessive oxidant stress may overload 
the protective HMP shunt or methemoglobin reductase 
pathways, causing Heinz body hemolysis or methemoglo -
bin formation, respectively. Hemolytic anemia caused by a 
drug, such as acetaminophen in cats, is an example of this 
mechanism.
A decreased RBC (Fig. 4) mass (anemia) may be caused 
by blood loss, hemolysis, or decreased production. In acute 
blood loss anemia, RBCs are lost, but mortality is usually 
related to loss of circulating volume rather than to loss 
of RBC. Iron is the limiting factor in chronic blood loss. 
Hemolysis may be caused by toxins, infectious agents, con-
genital abnormalities, or antibodies directed against RBC 
membrane antigens. Decreased RBC production may re -
sult from primary marrow diseases (e.g., aplastic anemia, 
hematopoietic malignancy, or myelofibrosis) or from other 
causes such as renal failure, drugs, toxins, or antibodies 
directed against RBC precursors. Malignancy of RBCs or 
their precursors may be acute (e.g., erythroleukemia) or 
chronic (e.g., polycythemia vera). Animals with erythro -
leukemia are anemic despite having a marrow filled with 
rubriblasts, whereas those with polycythemia vera have 
erythrocytosis (Table 1).
Erythrocytosis in dogs and cats has most commonly 
been associated with dehydration, high-altitude environ -
ments, and renal and cardiovascular disease.
2.1 Absolute erythrocytosis
2.1.1 Primary versus secondary absolute 
erythrocytosis
Primary versus secondary absolute erythrocytosis , de -
fined by an increase in RBC mass, may be either primary or 
secondary. Primary erythrocytosis (i.e., PV) is a myelopro-
liferative disorder characterized by clonal proliferation of 
neoplastic erythroid stem cells that require little or no EPO 
for clonal expansion, growth, and differentiation. Normal 
negative feedback inhibition of erythrocytosis does not 
 occur, and EPO levels are usually low or undetectable. In a 
distinct subset of humans, primary polycythemia is due to a 
familial and congenital genetic mutation of the EPO recep-
tor. This truncated EPO receptor protein mutation lacks the 
cytoplasmic negative regulatory portion, resulting in non -
neoplastic primary erythrocytosis ( Furukawa et  al., 1997; 
Kralovics et al., 1997).
In dogs and cats, primary erythrocytosis is considered 
a rare neoplastic disease of young to middle-aged animals 
without apparent sex or breed predilection ( Peterson and 
Randolph, 1982, 1983 ). In contrast to the situation in hu -
mans, leukocytosis, thrombocytosis, increased leukocyte al-
kaline phosphatase, and increased vitamin B 12 and vitamin 
B12-binding capacity have not been reported in either feline 
or canine cases. Although splenomegaly in veterinary pa -
tients has been reported, hepatomegaly, hypertension, and 
hyperuricemia have not. In veterinary medicine, therefore, 
the term primary erythrocytosis is more appropriate than 
polycythemia vera. Secondary erythrocytosis is caused by 
altered regulatory activity or excessive production of EPO. 
If systemic hypoxia is present, the increased EPO produc -
tion results in an increased RBC mass capable of increased 
oxygen-carrying capacity, which represents an appropriate, 
compensatory response. As outlined in Table 2, appropriate 
secondary erythrocytosis most often results from cardio -
vascular disease, chronic pulmonary disease, hemoglobin -
opathies such as methemoglobin reductase deficiency (rare 
in veterinary patients), decreased 2,3-diphosphoglycerate 
(2,3-DPG) levels in RBCs, high altitude environments, 
massive obesity, or neurologic disease causing depressed 
respiratory center function and decreased alveolar ventila -
tion. Elevated EPO levels are expected in these situations. 
Inappropriate secondary erythrocytosis is characterized by 
increased EPO levels without evidence of a hypoxic stim -
ulus. In both veterinary and human patients, neoplasia is 
TABLE 1 Terms used in various blood disorders of dogs 
and cats.
“philia” Increase in blood levels of 
that type of cell
Neutrophilia
“osis” An abnormal increase in 
blood levels of that type 
of cell can also refer to a 
disease process
Lymphocytosis
“penia” Decrease in blood levels 
of that type of cell
Neutropenia
“lysis” Destruction of that type 
of cell
Hemolysis
“emia” Denotes the presence of a 
substance in the blood
Polycythemia
“stasis” To stop or stabilize Hemostasis

Overview on diseases of blood and hematopoietic system  Chapter | 21  311
considered the most common cause. Both benign and ma -
lignant tumors have been reported in humans and include 
neoplasms of the kidney, lung, liver, uterus, ovaries, adrenal 
glands, thymus, and central nervous system. Renal cysts, 
hydronephrosis, and renal transplantation have also been 
reported as causes in humans.
Clinically significant erythrocytosis is recognized by a 
repeatable increase in PCV . Differentiation of relative from 
absolute erythrocytosis is mandatory because treatment of 
the two forms differs significantly. Evidence of fluid loss, 
dehydration, or vascular redistribution consistent with rela-
tive erythrocytosis is usually identified at the initial evalua-
tion, and these signs are easily correctable with replacement 
fluid therapy and resolution of the inciting cause. The find-
ing of an elevated PCV and reticulocytosis is consistent 
with absolute erythrocytosis. More difficult, however, is the 
differentiation between primary and secondary causes. The 
history and physical examination findings, in addition to 
appropriate laboratory and imaging test results, may reveal 
an underlying cardiopulmonary (appropriate) or neoplas -
tic (inappropriate) disease associated with EPO-dependent 
secondary causes of erythrocytosis. Primary erythrocy -
tosis is a rare, EPO-independent hematopoietic neoplas -
tic disease. The diagnosis is often made after a thorough 
search has excluded other causes of erythrocytosis and an 
appropriately low serum EPO level has been documented. 
Phlebotomy is currently the primary therapy in all forms 
of clinically significant absolute erythrocytosis. Concurrent 
treatment with hydroxyurea or 32P may be useful in some 
cases, although the small number of reported cases in which 
these therapies have been used has typically combined drug 
therapy with phlebotomy. Therefore, it is difficult to state 
that these treatment modalities are superior to phlebotomy 
alone. It is equally difficult to predict long-term survival for 
the various forms of absolute erythrocytosis in veterinary 
patients because studies evaluating such survival have yet to 
be conducted. However, long-term survival of patients with 
primary erythrocytosis, and perhaps some forms of second-
ary erythrocytosis, may be expected with attentive medical 
management (Nitsche, 2004).
2.2 Anemia in dogs and cats
Anemia is defined as an absolute decrease in the red cell 
mass as measured by RBC count, hemoglobin concentra -
tion, and/or PCV . It can develop from loss, destruction, or 
lack of production of RBCs. Anemia is classified as re -
generative or nonregenerative (Table 3). With regenerative 
anemia, the bone marrow responds appropriately to the de-
creased red cell mass by increasing RBC production and 
TABLE 2 Classification of erythrocytosis based on etiology.
Sl. no. Type Causes
1 Relative erythrocytosis Dehydration, loss of fluid due to burns (cutaneous loss), fluid redistribution, and 
splenic contracture in dogs
2 Absolute erythrocytosis  
 Primary
a. Primary erythrocytosis
 
Myeloproliferative disease
b. Familial erythrocytosis Autosomal dominant (humans), genetic
 Secondary
a. Appropriate erythrocytosis
 
Chronic respiratory disease and cardiovascular disease, high altitude environment, 
methemoglobin reductase deficiency, obesity, 2,3-diphosphoglycerate deficiency
b. Inappropriate erythrocytosis Neoplastic conditions in renal, hepatic, uterine, and ovary
Renal diseases like renal cyst, hydronephrosis, and pyelonephritis (dog)
 Iatrogenic Blood transfusion, exogenous EPO therapy
TABLE 3 Assessment of regeneration in anemia.
Sl. no.
Signs of regenerative 
anemia
Signs of 
nonregenerative 
anemia
1 Reticulocytosis >60,000 
or >1%
Reticulocytosis 
<60,000 or <1%
2 Macrocytosis (increased 
MCV)
Microcytosis 
(decreased MCV)
3 Nucleated RBCs (nRBC) Normocytic (normal 
MCV)
4 Polychromasia Lack of response in 
3–5 days
5 Hypochromia (decreased 
MCHC)
Normochromia 
(normal MCHC)
MCHC, mean corpuscular hemoglobin concentration; MCV, mean cell 
volume.

312 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
releasing reticulocytes. With nonregenerative anemia, the 
bone marrow responds inadequately to the increased need 
for RBCs. Anemia caused by hemorrhage or hemolysis is 
typically regenerative. Anemia caused by decreased eryth -
ropoietin or an abnormality in the bone marrow is nonre -
generative (Marks and Kendell, 2022).
2.2.1 Clinical findings
Clinical signs in anemic animals depend on the degree of 
anemia, the duration (acute or chronic), and the underlying 
cause. Acute anemia can result in shock and even death if 
more than a third of the blood volume is lost rapidly and not 
replaced. In acute blood loss, the animal usually presents 
with one or more of the following:
● tachycardia
● pale mucous membranes
● bounding or weak peripheral pulses
● hypotension
The cause of the blood loss may be overt, e.g., trauma. 
If no evidence of external bleeding is found, a source of 
internal or occult blood loss must be sought, e.g., a rup -
tured splenic tumor, other neoplasia, coagulopathy, GI ul -
ceration, or parasites. If hemolysis is present, the animal 
may be icteric.
Animals with chronic anemia have had time to accom-
modate, and their clinical presentation is usually more indo-
lent with vague signs such as:
● lethargy
● weakness
● anorexia
These animals may have similar physical examination 
findings such as pale mucous membranes and weak periph-
eral pulses. The lack of expected clinical signs may alert 
the clinician to the time frame involved. Splenomegaly, ab-
dominal distention, and/or heart murmur may be present, 
depending on the underlying cause of anemia.
3 White blood cells in animals
The principal function of phagocytes is to defend against 
invading microorganisms by ingesting and destroying 
them, thus contributing to cellular inflammatory responses. 
There are two types of phagocytes: mononuclear phago-
cytes and granulocytes. Mononuclear phagocytes arise 
primarily from the marrow and are released into the blood 
as monocytes. They may circulate for hours to a few days 
before entering the tissues and differentiating to become 
macrophages. Granulocytes have a segmented nucleus and 
are classified according to their staining characteristics as 
neutrophils ( Fig.  1), eosinophils ( Fig.  2), or basophils. 
Neutrophils circulate for only a few hours before traveling 
to the tissues (Cotter, 2022a,b,c,d).
Pancytopenia (i.e., a decrease in all circulating hema -
tologic cell lines) can result from peripheral destruction of 
cells or a primary insult to the bone marrow. Many infec -
tious, immune-mediated, and neoplastic conditions have 
been associated with pancytopenia in dogs and cats. Bone 
marrow aspirates and/or core biopsy samples are generally 
required to fully characterize the marrow disease, espe -
cially in cases of decreased hematopoietic cell production. 
Understanding the mechanisms by which various disorders 
alter circulating blood or marrow cells may aid in devel -
oping a diagnostic and/or treatment plan. The prognosis in 
pancytopenic patients is variable and depends on the under-
lying cause (Kearns and Ewing, 2006).
Pancytopenia (in Greek, “pan” means “all”) is defined 
as decreased circulating numbers of all marrow cell lines: 
myeloid, erythroid, and megakaryocytic. Clinical signs 
related to pancytopenia are often nonspecific. Pallor and 
FIG. 1 Canine neutrophils.
FIG. 2 Canine eosinophil.

Overview on diseases of blood and hematopoietic system  Chapter | 21  313
bleeding tendencies, such as petechiae, are the most com -
mon clinical manifestations and are directly related to ane -
mia and thrombocytopenia, respectively. Most clinical signs 
are referable to the underlying condition. However, certain 
physical examination findings may help direct the diagnos-
tic course. An accurate and thorough history is essential in 
determining the cause of pancytopenia.
3.1 Decreased hematopoietic marrow cell 
production
Causes of decreased hematopoietic marrow cell produc -
tion include marrow hypoplasia or aplasia, bone marrow 
necrosis, marrow fibrosis/sclerosis, myelophthisis, and my-
elodysplastic syndrome (MDS). Many infectious, neoplas -
tic, inflammatory, or immune-mediated diseases can result 
in decreased cellular production by various mechanisms. 
Although hematopoietic marrow cells decrease in number, 
the overall cellularity of the marrow may increase, espe -
cially in cases of myelodysplasia, myelophthisis, and mar -
row necrosis.
3.2 Five distinct stages in the process of 
phagocytosis have been identified
1. Attraction of phagocytes (chemotaxis) to microorgan -
isms, antigen-antibody complexes, and other mediators 
of inflammation
2. Attachment to the organism
3. Ingestion
4. Fusion of cell lysosomes with ingested microorganisms 
and bacterial killing
5. Digestion
Eosinophils (Fig. 2), while having a role as phagocytes, 
also have more specific functions that include providing a 
defense against metazoan parasites and modulating the in -
flammatory process. They respond chemotactically to his -
tamine, immune complexes, and eosinophil chemotactic 
factor of anaphylaxis, a substance released by degranulat -
ing mast cells. Basophils are not true phagocytes but con -
tain large amounts of histamine and other mediators of 
inflammation. Eosinophilia and basophilia may be seen in 
response to systemic allergic reactions and invasion of tis -
sues by parasites.
4 Lymphocytes in animals
Lymphocytes ( Fig.  3) are responsible for both humoral 
and cellular immunity. Cells of the two branches of the im-
mune system cannot be differentiated morphologically, but 
they differ in their dynamics of production and circulation. 
Lymphocyte production in mammals originates in the bone 
marrow. Some of the lymphocytes destined to be involved 
in cellular immunity migrate to the thymus and differenti -
ate further under the influence of thymic hormones. These 
become T cells and are responsible for a variety of helper or 
cytotoxic immunologic functions. Most circulating lympho-
cytes are T cells, but T cells are also present in the spleen 
and lymph nodes. The B cells migrate directly to organs 
without undergoing modification in the thymus and are re -
sponsible for humoral immunity (antibody production).
Thus, lymphoid organs have populations of both B and 
T lymphocytes. In the lymph nodes, follicular centers are 
primarily B cells, and parafollicular zones are primarily 
T cells. In the spleen, most of the lymphocytes of the red 
pulp are B cells, whereas those of the periarteriolar lym -
phoid sheaths are T cells. The close association of T cells 
and B cells within lymphoid organs is essential to immune 
function.
Antibody molecules (immunoglobulins) fall into several 
classes, each with its own functional characteristics. For 
example, IgA is the principal antibody of respiratory and 
intestinal secretions, IgM is the first antibody produced in 
response to a newly recognized antigen, IgG is the principal 
antibody of the circulating blood, and IgE is the principal 
antibody involved in allergic reactions.
The humoral immune system also is related to both the 
nonspecific immune system and the cellular immune sys -
tem in other ways. Both “helper” (CD4) and “cytotoxic” 
(CD8) T cell classes have been described. Helper T cells 
recognize processed antigen and activate the humoral im -
mune response. Cytotoxic T cells, after sensitization by an-
tigen, are effector cells, which are especially important in 
antiviral immunity. Natural killer cells, which are a class 
of lymphocytes distinct from T cells and B cells, destroy 
foreign cells (e.g., neoplastic cells) even without prior sen -
sitization. Antigen processing by macrophages precedes the 
FIG. 3 Canine eosinophil and lymphocyte.

314 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
recognition of an antigen by lymphocytes. These complex 
processes are involved in routine surveillance against neo -
plastic cells and recognition of “self.”
5 Platelets in animals
Platelets (Fig. 4) form the initial hemostatic plug whenever 
hemorrhage occurs. They also are the source of a phospho-
lipid, which is needed for the interaction of coagulation 
factors to form a fibrin clot. Platelets are produced in the 
bone marrow from megakaryocytes, under the influence 
of thrombopoietin. Platelet production begins with the in -
vagination of the megakaryocyte cell membrane and the 
formation of cytoplasmic channels and islands. The cyto -
plasmic islands produce platelets by fragmentation from the 
megakaryocyte.
Local platelet aggregation is stimulated by ADP, with 
the ultimate formation of the primary platelet plug. The lo -
cal accumulation of fibrin and platelets is known as a hemo-
static plug. The fibrin clot that then forms is consolidated 
by the action of platelet contractile proteins.
Platelet disorders are either quantitative (thrombocyto -
penia or thrombocytosis) or qualitative (thrombocytopathy). 
Thrombocytopenia is one of the most common bleeding 
disorders in animals. In general, platelet counts must fall 
to <30,000/μL before the risk of hemorrhage increases. 
Consumption, destruction, or sequestration of platelets 
causes thrombocytopenia associated with increased produc-
tion by the bone marrow. Consumptive thrombocytopenia 
occurs with massive hemorrhage or with disseminated in -
travascular coagulation, secondary to a variety of diseases. 
Destruction occurs in immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, 
in which platelets become coated with antiplatelet antibod-
ies and are removed from circulation by the fixed phagocyte 
system. Excessive sequestration of platelets by an enlarged 
spleen (hypersplenism) may occur in conditions such as 
myeloproliferative diseases.
Decreased production of platelets in the marrow may be 
caused by drugs, toxins, or by primary marrow disorders 
such as aplasia, fibrosis, or hematopoietic malignancy. In 
primary marrow disorders, more than one hematopoietic 
cell line is often decreased, resulting in pancytopenia.
Ehrlichial infections should be considered in the differ -
ential diagnosis for cats and dogs with multiple cytopenias. 
This leads to petechial (Fig. 5) and ecchymotic hemorrhages 
(Fig. 6) in the ventral abdomen and nasal epistaxis (Fig. 7).
Thrombocytosis is rare and often idiopathic . It may 
be associated with primary marrow disease such as in mega-
karyocytic leukemia. It is often associated with chronic 
blood loss and iron deficiency because of increased platelet 
production in the marrow reacting to continued consump -
tion and loss.
5.1 Thrombocytopathies
Thrombocytopathies comprise a poorly defined group of 
diseases in which platelet numbers are normal but their func-
tion is impaired. V on Willebrand disease is characterized 
FIG. 4 Canine RBC’s and platelets.
FIG. 5 Petechial hemorrhage.

Overview on diseases of blood and hematopoietic system  Chapter | 21  315
primarily by a defect in platelet adhesion to the endothe -
lium. The platelets themselves are normal. Other hereditary 
disorders of platelet function have been described but are 
relatively rare. Probably the most common platelet function 
defect is the irreversible inhibition of thromboxane (which 
is necessary for platelet aggregation) caused by aspirin 
administration.
5.2 Bleeding disorders in dogs and cats
5.2.1 Definition
● Bleeding disorders are conditions in which the blood 
does not clot normally, causing a tendency to bleed ab -
normally or excessively after minor bumps or cuts.
5.2.2 Introduction
Systemic bleeding disorders responsible for spontaneous 
or inappropriate hemorrhage are common in dogs and cats. 
Most are acquired but some are inherited. Because bleeding 
disorders can be potentially life-threatening, it is imperative 
that a logical diagnostic approach be used to quickly estab-
lish the diagnosis and implement appropriate therapy. Such 
an approach requires a sound understanding of hemostasis 
and the pathophysiology of the disorders themselves.
5.3 Primary hemostasis
5.3.1 Platelet plug formation
When an injury occurs to a blood vessel, the first slowing of 
blood results from constriction of the vessel. Vascular spasm 
is mediated by nervous reflexes from the injured vessel and 
nearby tissues, local muscle spasm, and factors released 
from platelets and traumatized tissues. Platelets coming 
into contact with a traumatized vessel wall’s exposed sub -
endothelial collagen will adhere and change. The exposed 
tissue contains V on Willebrand’s factor (a.k.a. factor VIIIR: 
Ag or VWF) and fibronectin, contact proteins that activate 
the platelets and cause them to become “sticky.” The plate-
lets bind to the subendothelial collagen, and their contractile 
proteins forcefully eject multiple active factors that promote 
further adhesion, shape change, and granule release in ad -
joining platelets. This successive attraction forms a platelet 
plug, which can stop blood loss by itself in small vessels or 
larger vessels with small injuries. Platelets play an integral 
role in maintaining normal vascular integrity by closing the 
thousands of minute ruptures that occur daily in the body.
5.4 Secondary hemostasis
Clotting of the plasma secondary to the interaction of coag-
ulation factors. In larger vessels or more traumatized tissue, 
the fragile platelet plug forms a temporary seal, and a blood 
clot is required to stop the bleeding. Secondary hemosta -
sis involves the formation of fibrin on the surface of the 
platelet plug by coagulation factors. These factors, denoted 
by Roman numerals, circulate as inactive precursor forms 
of proteolytic enzymes. At the site of injury, they become 
converted to their active forms—the sequential activation 
of one factor leading to another is where the terminology 
of the “clotting cascade” originates. Although the coagula -
tion cascade is often divided into an extrinsic, intrinsic, and 
common pathway—done to allow visualization of the clot-
ting inside and outside the vascular system—these systems 
can and do often work together to trigger coagulation. The 
culmination of the activation and interaction of these clot -
ting factors is the creation of a fibrin framework over the 
unstable initial platelet plug, i.e., the blood clot.
5.4.1 Fibrinolysis
The process whereby the blood clot is removed once the 
integrity of the blood vessel is restored. Once a blood clot is 
FIG. 6 Ecchymotic hemorrhage.
FIG. 7 Epistaxis in a dog.

316 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
formed, it is essential that it is eventually dissolved so that 
adequate blood flow can be reestablished. Plasmin is a pro-
teolytic enzyme that digests fibrin fibers as well as factors 
V , VIII, XII, and prothrombin and causes the eventual lysis 
of the blood clot. As fibrin is cleaved by plasmin, it leaves 
behind cross‐linked fragments known as fibrin degradation 
products (FDPs) (Fig. 8).
5.5 Diseases of primary hemostasis
Platelet dysfunction is classically divided into extrinsic and 
intrinsic causes. Extrinsic disorders present with a defi -
ciency of an extrinsic protein necessary for platelet func -
tion. The most common cause of extrinsic disorders is von 
Willebrand Disease (VWD). Disorders of fibrinogen, either 
hypofibrinogenemia or dysfibrinogenemia, can also cause 
extrinsic defects because fibrinogen is necessary for plate -
let aggregation. Acquired forms of fibrinogen defects are 
much more common than genetic forms. Intrinsic disorders 
affect the function of the platelet. Defects can arise from 
abnormalities in membrane receptors, storage granules, or 
signal transduction (Boudreaux, 2012). Intrinsic platelet de-
fects that have been described in the veterinary literature in-
clude Glanzmann’s thrombasthenia (GT), Chediak-Higashi 
syndrome (CHS), cyclic hematopoiesis, leukocyte adhesion 
deficiencies, May-Hegglin anomaly, adenosine diphosphate 
(ADP) abnormalities, macrothrombocytopenia, and vari -
ous thrombopathies (Boudreaux, 2012). A defect in platelet 
function usually manifests itself as bleeding from mucosal 
surfaces, bruising, or in extreme cases, cavitary bleeding. 
When platelets are low in number but normal in function, 
the animal typically presents with petechiae or ecchymo -
sis due to the extravasation of red blood cells. Trophogens, 
secreted from platelets, are needed to maintain endothelial 
tight junctions and, when low, can lead to red blood cell 
leakage (Brooks and Catalfamo, 2010).
5.5.1 Von Willebrand disease
V on Willebrand factor (vWF) is thought to be an essential 
protein in the adhesion of platelets to areas of damaged en-
dothelium. It is synthesized by endothelial cells and mega -
karyocytes and stored in endothelial cells and, to a lesser 
degree, platelets. In its active form, vWF circulates as 
 various-sized molecules join together to make multimers that 
range in size from 500 to 200,000 kDa. The large-molecular- 
weight multimers are important in hemostasis because they 
are the most effective at supporting platelet adhesion. The 
most common inherited bleeding disorder in humans and 
dogs is vWD (Carr et al., 2009). It is caused by both struc -
tural and quantitative deficiencies of vWF, depending on 
the type, and has been classified into three different catego-
ries (Carr et al., 2009 ). Type 1 is the most common form 
of vWD and is characterized by a low concentration but 
normal function of all multimers. Most animals with type 
1 vWD have mild clinical signs that occur most commonly 
with trauma, hematuria, or deciduous tooth loss. There can 
be life-threatening intraoperative or postoperative hemor -
rhage in some cases (Brooks, 2010).
The activated partial thromboplastin time (aPTT) and 
activated clotting time (ACT) can be normal or prolonged 
in patients with vWD. Because vWF serves as a carrier 
molecule for FVIII, decreased concentrations of vWF are 
associated with decreased factor VIII levels. Prolongation 
of the aPTT or ACT usually occurs when the factor levels 
are below 30% of normal. If the FVIII is below 30%, a pro-
longed aPTT will be seen in patients with vWD.
Type 2 vWD is characterized by a low concentration of 
vWF with a preferential deficiency in the high-  molecular-
weight multimers. The lack of high-molecular-weight 
multimers makes platelet adhesion much less effective. 
A complete absence of all multimers characterizes type 3 
vWD (Carr et al., 2009; Brooks, 2010).
FIG. 8 Process of fibrinolysis.

Overview on diseases of blood and hematopoietic system  Chapter | 21  317
5.6 Disorders of coagulation
Disorders of coagulation make up a smaller percentage 
of inherited hemostatic disorders than primary hemostatic 
disorders.
5.6.1 Hemophilia A
Hemophilia A is a deficiency of factor VIII and the most 
common inherited deficiency of coagulation. This disor -
der has a well-characterized X-linked recessive inheritance 
pattern and is expressed in male individuals almost exclu -
sively. De novo mutations occur sporadically in individu -
als, leading to an acquired form of the disorder ( Brooks, 
1999). Clinical bleeding is inversely proportional to the 
relative factor levels in plasma as FVIII is instrumental in 
the propagation phase of coagulation. A severe deficiency 
in FVIII results in the inability to generate enough thrombin 
for mature clot formation ( Brooks, 2010 ). Hemarthrosis, 
subcutaneous bleeding, and prolonged bleeding from minor 
injuries are typical ( Smith, 2010). The diagnosis of hemo -
philia A is relatively straightforward in affected males. In 
the bleeding patient, a deficiency in the intrinsic pathway 
may be evident by a prolongation of the aPTT or ACT with 
a normal prothrombin time (PT).
5.6.2 Hemophilia B
Hemophilia B is a deficiency of FIX and is also called 
Christmas disease after the Canadian man was originally 
diagnosed with the disease (Ingram, 1976). Hemophilia B is 
an X-linked recessive trait but occurs much less frequently 
than hemophilia A. It is estimated to have an incidence of 
25% of hemophilia A (Brooks, 1999). It has a clinical pre -
sentation that is very similar to hemophilia A and has been 
found in many different breeds of dogs and cats ( Brooks, 
1999). The diagnosis of hemophilia B is similar to that of 
hemophilia A as factor analysis will demonstrate the defi -
ciency in the affected patients.
6 Neoplasia of the myeloid system
The myeloid division of the hematopoietic system includes 
the neoplasms derived from erythroid, granulocytic (neutro-
phil, eosinophil, and basophil) monocytic, and megakaryo-
cytic cell series and their progenitors. The major neoplastic 
expressions of the myeloid cell series are listed in Table 1 
under the general heading of neoplastic myeloproliferative 
diseases ( Moulton and Dungworth, 1978 ; Schalm et  al., 
1975). The predominant type of cellular differentiation is 
also listed. The term myeloproliferative disease implies a 
complex set of related diseases, not all of which are neo -
plastic, and includes the possibility of change in expression 
during the course of the disease. For example, the assumed 
genetic defect(s) responsible for the neoplastic process may 
occur in either a progenitor limited to differentiation into 
one cell series or a progenitor that may differentiate into 
one cell series, or a progenitor that may differentiate into 
more than one cell type. The occurrence of more than one 
neoplastic cell type may occur simultaneously or sequen -
tially with a change from one to a second during the course 
of the disease (for example, myelomonocytic and erythro -
leukemia). Also recognized is an association of these neo -
plasms with diseases that do not have a clearly neoplastic 
or clonal basis. The latter would include polycythemia vera 
characterized by excessive erythropoiesis and myelofibro -
sis with myeloid metaplasia. Dogs with polycythemia vera 
would be expected to have a packed cell volume of 65 to 
80, an absence of respiratory or cardiovascular disease 
that could be capable of inducing secondary polycythemia 
through a physiologic mechanism, and an absence of the 
usual tissue-invasive or destructive events of a myeloid neo-
plasm. McGrath (1974) described myelofibrosis with my -
eloid metaplasia as having a progressive and fatal course 
that does not appear to have been well documented in the 
dog as a naturally occurring disease. This process was first 
described in humans and has been recognized in cats, but it 
has been recognized only in experimentally irradiated dogs 
(Moulton and Dungworth, 1978).
6.1 Lymphoid system neoplasia
The anatomic classification presented in Table  4 is a bi -
nomial system with two parts to the designation for each 
neoplasm. The first part is based on the gross anatomic dis-
tribution of lesions in the body, and the second part is based 
on the histologic evaluation of the cell type and cellular 
organization in lesions. This binomial system, with minor 
TABLE 4 Classification of Lymphoid Neoplasia in the 
Dog.
Anatomic pattern Thymic form of malignant lymphoma
Alimentary form of malignant 
lymphoma
Multicentric form of malignant 
lymphoma Lymphocytic leukemia
Miscellaneous forms (solitary, skin)
Histologic 
classification
Pattern of lesion
Diffuse
Nodular (follicular)
Predominant cell type
Undifferentiated (stem cell)
Histiocytic (reticulum cell sarcoma)
Poorly differentiated lymphocytic 
(lymphoblastic)
Well-differentiated lymphocytic 
(lymphocytic)
Mixed cell (histiocytic-lymphocytic)
Plasmacytoid differentiation

318 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
variations, has been proposed by several groups (Holmberg 
and Wilson, 1980 ). Malignant lymphoma is synonymous 
with lymphosarcoma, which is used in most other classi -
fications (Moulton and Dungworth, 1978). Malignant lym-
phoma is the designation for all lymphoid neoplasms other 
than lymphoid leukemias, which are a separate anatomic 
form, as described in the following section.
6.2 Anatomic pattern
6.2.1 Thymic form of malignant lymphoma
The largest lesion is located within the anterior mediasti -
num, reflecting the apparent original location of neoplas -
tic cell growth. Thymic epithelial remnants can usually be 
demonstrated histologically within the lymphoid neoplasm 
but are easily differentiated from the true thymoma of epi -
thelial cells. Thymic lymphomas are a relatively uncommon 
form of malignant lymphoma in the dog and are apparently 
composed of T lymphocytes ( Onions, 1979 ), as has been 
shown for similar cases in cats ( Holmberg et  al., 1976 ). 
Progression to lymph nodes and other organs occurs to a 
variable degree. Although only a limited number of cases 
were examined, earlier and more widespread dissemination 
has been observed in the dog than in the cat in which extra-
thymic dissemination is frequently minimal until the termi-
nal stages of the disease. Thymic lymphomas comprise 2% 
of the canine lymphoid neoplasms of one series ( Theilen 
and Maidwell, 1979).
6.2.2 Alimentary form of malignant lymphoma
The predominant tumor mass is located and appears to 
originate, within the wall of the alimentary· canal and the 
immediately associated mesenteric lymph nodes. The neo -
plastic involvement may progress to lymph nodes and other 
organs throughout the body, but the alimentary tract lesions 
remain prominent. The alimentary form is the second most 
frequent anatomic type in the dog; it comprises 7% to 45% 
of the cases, depending on geographic locations ( Theilen 
and Maidwell, 1979).
6.2.3 Multicentric form of malignant 
lymphoma
The multicentric form is characterized by bilateral sym -
metric enlargement of most, if not all, superficial lymph 
nodes, visceral lymph nodes, spleen, and liver. These tis -
sues are typically uniformly involved at the onset of clini -
cally recognized disease. Progression of the disease can 
lead to the involvement of any organ; the most commonly 
involved organs include the tonsils, lungs, kidneys, alimen-
tary canal, and bone marrow. Blood vascular involvement 
is detectable in 7% to 13% of animals at the time of recog -
nition of the clinical disease and generally is present only 
when there is bone marrow involvement ( Anderson et al., 
1969). In contrast to those of the true leukemia form, the 
abnormal lymphocyte numbers in the blood of animals with 
the multicentric form are typically low (when detectable) 
until the terminal stage of the disease, and the histologic 
pattern of hematopoietic organ involvement is different. 
Multicentric malignant lymphoma is the most common ana-
tomic form observed in the dog; it comprises 45% to 84% 
of cases, depending on the geographic location ( Moulton 
and Dungworth, 1978 ). The multicentric, alimentary, and 
thymic forms of malignant lymphoma have similar histo -
logic patterns of neoplastic localization in organs and ac -
count for approximately 90% of the lymphoid neoplasms 
in the dog. Lymph node involvement first occurs diffusely 
through the cortex with less involvement of medullary 
cords and sinusoids. Splenic involvement is initially within 
the white pulp compartment (follicles and/or periarteriolar 
lymphatic sheaths), although specific localization cannot be 
determined in advanced lesions. The early splenic lesions 
may be recognized as either focally distinct follicular in -
volvement or as linear accumulations within the periarte -
riolar lymphatic sheaths. Hepatic involvement is usually 
more prominent within the portal canals with less severe 
involvement along hepatic cords. Occasional cases are seen 
without diffuse sinusoidal involvement throughout the aci -
nar units without the portal canal accumulations. Lung in -
volvement is typically most prominent in periarteriolar and 
peribronchiolar locations.
6.3 Leukemic form (lymphocytic leukemia)
Lymphocytic leukemia is restricted in this anatomic classi-
fication to those lymphoid neoplasms that have, from incep-
tion, marked involvement of the blood, bone marrow, liver, 
spleen, and lymph nodes. Lymphocyte counts in the blood of 
30,000 to 150,000 are to be expected in true leukemia, which 
also has a different tissue localization than the malignant 
lymphoma forms. Early tissue localization in the leukemic 
form is in the splenic cords of the red pulp, the medullary 
cord of lymph nodes, ·and in a diffuse sinusoidal pattern in 
the liver. The bone marrow is diffusely involved from the on-
set of the disease. Lymphocytic leukemia is the least common 
form observed in the dog (less than 1% of lymphoid neo -
plasms). Biologically different acute (or blastic) and chronic 
(or small lymphocytic) forms of the disease have not been 
characterized in the dog.
6.4 Other miscellaneous forms of malignant 
lymphoma
Less than 10% of canine lymphoid neoplasms do not fit 
in one of the preceding categories. These miscellaneous 
forms include solitary or regionally restricted lesions 
(that is, cases with skin involvement). The spectrum of 
cases with significant skin involvement has not been well

Overview on diseases of blood and hematopoietic system  Chapter | 21  319
 characterized in the dog, although they comprise up to 
7% of the cases. Cases with multifocal skin lesions may 
be variants of advanced multicentric malignant lympho -
mas (Anderson et al., 1969 ), although the similarity to the 
mycosis fungoides complex of man should be evaluated 
(Kelley et al., 1972 ).
6.5 Histologic classification
Histologic evaluation of lymphoid neoplasms includes 
two components (see Table 3). First, one must characterize 
the pattern of neoplastic cell organization in the lesions as 
either nodular or diffuse ( Holmberg et al., 1976 ). Nodular 
follicular malignant lymphomas are not recognized as 
frequently in dogs (up to 16%) as they are in men (ap -
proximately 40%). The presence of a nodular pattern in 
peripheral lymph nodes has been recognized only in mul -
ticentric and alimentary forms of malignant lymphomas 
and was demonstrated to be of a B cell nature ( Holmberg 
et  al., 1976 ). Characterization and nomenclature of the 
predominant cell type in lymphoid neoplasms are the most 
variable aspects of the anatomic classification of lymphoid 
neoplasia in the dog. The criteria for the cytologic clas -
sifications are based on the evaluation of hematoxylin and 
eosin-stained histologic sections. Lesions must be prop -
erly trimmed and quickly fixed in buffered 10% formalin 
for evaluation. Cytologic features of lesion imprints or 
aspirates do correlate with the histologic appearance but 
are comparative. Evaluation is difficult because of slide 
imprint variation due to cell shrinkage, cell rupture, stain 
retention, and an inability to evaluate the anatomic asso -
ciation between individual cells and location within the 
lymph node. The morphologic criteria for the cytologic 
categories of malignant lymphoma and their use in the 
dog have been described ( Holmberg et al., 1976 ). The un-
differentiated or stem cell type is characterized by very 
uniform, round, large nuclei that lack chromatin clumping 
and have relatively small nuclei. The small amount of pale 
cytoplasm frequently has indistinct cell borders in histo -
logic sections. Canine lymphomas of this undifferentiated 
cell type that lack either the smaller lymphocytic or the 
histiocytic differentiation are uncommon. The histiocytic 
cell type of malignant lymphoma includes a range of cell 
types having in common a large vesicular nucleus with 
a large, prominent nucleolus and abundant, but variably 
staining, cytoplasm. This cell type has the largest nucleus 
of lymphoid neoplasms, which may be round, oval, or have 
nuclear indentations. The term histiocytic is used only in 
a descriptive sense to reflect the morphologic features that 
were previously believed to resemble a tissue histiocyte 
or macrophage cell type. This cell type is now recognized 
to reflect the same size and cytologic features seen in im -
munoblasts or large lymphocytes that are in the process of 
responding to foreign antigens.

320 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

321

Chapter 22
Diseases and disorders of the 
musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats
Diseases of the musculoskeletal system hinder the mobil -
ity of the animal, thereby causing agony for the animal as 
well as for the pet parents. There are different musculoskel-
etal disorders in dogs and cats. Each got its own causes, 
symptoms, and treatment. Diseases of the musculoskeletal 
system can also indicate diseases of muscles, neurologic 
problems, toxins in the body, hormonal abnormalities, 
metabolic disorders, infectious diseases, blood and vascular 
disorders, poor nutrition, and birth defects (Adams, 2022).
Body movements depend on the muscular activity like 
to see, breathe, urinate, breed, chew, and swallow.
1 Myopathies
Disorders that affect the muscle membrane or muscle fibers 
are called as “myopathies.” Causes include
1. Hereditary
2. Injury
3. Nutritional imbalances (Fig. 1)
4. Metabolic disturbances
5. Cancer
6. Poisoning
Common myopathies include polymyositis and exer -
tional myopathy.
2 Myositis
2.1 Definition
It is an inflammatory muscle reaction.
2.2 Causes
1. Infections (Fig. 2)
2. Parasitic diseases
3. Immune-mediated conditions (Fig. 5)
2.3 Tendinitis
2.3.1 Definition
Inflammation of the tendons.
2.3.2 Causes
1. Abnormal contraction of the shoulder muscle
2. Inflammation of the biceps
3. Contracted quadriceps
4. Achilles tendon disruption
5. Pelvic muscle trauma (Iliopsoas)
3 Prevention of musculoskeletal 
disorders
1. A well-balanced diet
2. Weight management
3. Prompt treatment of injuries
4. Regular exercise
Among these, there are many congenital and inher -
ited musculoskeletal disorders in dogs ( Hanson, 2022). It 
includes
1. Glycogenosis
2. Hip dysplasia (Fig. 3)
3. Muscular dystrophy (myopathy)
4. Osteochondrosis or
5. Osteochondritis dissecans
4 Bone disorders in dogs
Bone disorders in dogs are caused by an imbalanced diet, 
particularly an imbalance in trace minerals like copper, 
magnesium, and zinc. Other causes like trauma which in -
cludes crack or fracture and infection.

322 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
Bones are the rigid structure of the body and protect the 
internal organs from damage. They possess bone marrow 
and act as a reservoir of body’s calcium and phosphorus.
4.1 Hypertrophic osteodystrophy
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy—also known as skeletal 
scurvy, canine scurvy, Moller-Barlow’s disease, osteodys -
trophy type 2, metaphyseal osteopathy, and metaphyseal 
dysplasia—is a developmental disease of young large- and 
giant-breed dogs. The most commonly affected bones are 
the radius, ulna, and tibia, and the disease is often bilateral 
(Balsa and Robinson, 2016).
4.1.1 Signalment
Age at diagnosis is typically 2 to 6 months (Towle and Breur, 
2012). Male dogs appear to be predisposed compared with 
females. At-risk breeds include the Great Dane, Chesapeake 
Bay retriever, Irish setter, boxer, German Shepherd dog, 
Golden and Labrador retrievers, and Weimaraner; this dis -
ease is heritable in Weimaraners (Abeles et al., 1999).
4.1.2 Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on signalment, history, physical exami -
nation findings, and radiographic findings. Hypertrophic 
osteodystrophy is characterized by painful swelling of the 
metaphyseal region of long bones in the appendicular skel-
eton. Patients are often systemically ill with fever, lethargy, 
inappetence, or diarrhea. Radiographs are critical in con -
firming the diagnosis:
● The condition is characterized by a lucent line in the 
metaphyseal region parallel to the physis, also referred 
to as a double physis (Wisner and Pollard, 2007).
FIG. 1 Dog showing congenital abnormality due to mineral deficiency.
FIG. 2 Pup showing botulism—myopathy due to infectious origin.
FIG. 3 Dog X-ray showing hip dysplasia.

Musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats  Chapter | 22  323
● Periosteal or endosteal reaction in the region of the phy-
sis is typically present.
● Subperiosteal hemorrhage can result in new bone for -
mation, which is noted palisading along the periosteum 
and, in some patients, bridging the physis. The severity 
and duration of the disease influence the extent of new 
bone formation and, in some patients, may extend to the 
level of diaphysis (Wisner and Pollard, 2007). When the 
affected bone is examined histologically, necrosis of tra-
becular bone, inflammatory cellular infiltration, hemor-
rhage, and hemosiderin deposits are present. Subclinical 
fractures are common. Subperiosteal hemorrhage not 
only leads to new bone formation but can also result in 
synostosis; both can lead to disturbance of appropriate 
growth and resulting deformities (Peterson and Kutzler, 
2011; Towle and Breur, 2012).
4.1.3 Differential diagnosis
Differential diagnosis includes septic arthritis, septic phy -
sitis, secondary nutritional hyperparathyroidism, retained 
cartilage cores, hypertrophic osteopathy, and panosteitis. 
It is important to differentiate this disease from hypertro -
phic osteopathy, which is characterized by the deposition of 
periosteal new bone, most typically in the distal extremities 
and long bones. Hypertrophic osteopathy is thought to be a 
secondary disorder most often associated with pulmonary 
neoplasia (primary or metastatic) (Kustritz, 2007).
4.1.4 Treatment
Hypertrophic osteodystrophy is most commonly self-  
limiting in days to months; however, signs may last for 
months. For mild cases, supportive care with NSAIDs is 
recommended, while severe cases may require hospitaliza -
tion for more aggressive supportive care, fluid and nutri -
tional therapy, and injectable opioid analgesics. Affected 
patients should consume a complete and balanced, age-  
appropriate diet. Vitamin C and vitamin D therapies have 
been described, but there is no evidence that supplementa -
tion is helpful in disease treatment. Blood cultures are in -
dicated for immunocompromised patients. If cultures are 
positive, appropriate antibiotic support may be warranted 
(Schulz et al., 1991).
4.1.5 Prognosis
In mildly affected patients, the prognosis is excellent, but 
in severely affected patients, the disease may be fatal. 
Recurrence is possible, usually within months of the pri -
mary episode. As noted previously, the development of 
angular limb deformities is possible in severe cases and 
owners should be warned of this possibility. Client educa -
tion is essential because they will need to monitor the pet 
for growth deformities.
4.2 Pediatric bone diseases (panosteitis)
Panosteitis—also known as enostosis, eosinophilic panos -
teitis, juvenile osteomyelitis, and osteomyelitis of young 
German Shepherd dogs—is a self-limiting disease of the 
long bones of large- and giant-breed dogs. It most com -
monly affects the ulna, followed by the radius, humerus, 
femur, and tibia. The cause of panosteitis is unknown, but 
it may be the result of excessively high dietary protein or 
calcium administration that causes protein accumulation 
and/or vascular proliferation and local bone formation at 
nutrient foramina, which increases intraosseous pressures 
(Peterson and Kutzler, 2011).
4.2.1 Signalment
Age at diagnosis is most often 5 to 12  months; however, 
panosteitis may affect younger dogs and those up to 5 years 
of age. Males are more commonly affected than females. 
Breeds at risk of developing panosteitis include the Airedale 
terrier, Irish setter, German shorthaired pointer, Doberman 
pinscher, Afghan, Great Dane, Saint Bernard, Bernese 
mountain dog, Newfoundland, Golden and Labrador re -
trievers, and German Shepherd dog. Some small- and 
medium-sized breeds also appear to be at risk, including 
the Basset Hound, Chinese Shar-Pei, Miniature Schnauzer, 
Scottish terrier, and American cocker spaniel.
Weight is a contributing factor, and young dogs weigh -
ing more than 23  kg are at increased risk compared with 
those weighing less than 23  kg. Females and males over 
23 kg are three and five times, respectively, at greater risk 
(Towle and Breur, 2012).
4.2.2 Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on signalment, history, physical exami -
nation findings, and radiographic findings. There are gen -
erally no systemic signs of illness. Physical examination 
findings include a shifting leg lameness and pain on palpa -
tion of the long bones. In some patients, pain is so severe 
that it impedes ambulation and can also result in hyporexia 
or unwillingness to eat and drink. Note that care must be 
taken during palpation to avoid eliciting pain by palpating/
compressing a nerve or other structure. In the acute phase, 
radiographs may be normal or show circumscribed cortical 
bone opacities within the medullary canal adjacent to the 
nutrient foramina. As the disease progresses, the medullary 
pattern changes to a coarser than normal trabecular pattern, 
and a progressive periosteal reaction may be present. The 
severity of radiographic signs does not necessarily parallel 
the severity of clinical signs.
4.2.3 Differential diagnoses
Differential diagnoses include hypertrophic osteodystrophy, 
osteochondritis dissecans, hip dysplasia, fragmented medial

324 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
coronoid process, and united anconeal process. Treatment 
In general, treatment does not appear to affect outcomes 
(Kustritz, 2007).
4.2.4 Therapy
Therapy includes exercise restriction and analgesics while 
the condition resolves. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory 
drugs (NSAIDs) are often sufficient to manage pain, but pa-
tients in severe discomfort require hospitalization with in -
jectable opioid agonists and intravenous fluid support. It is 
generally accepted that steroid and antibiotic administration 
is not necessary and should be avoided. Recurrence is pos -
sible, although severity appears to diminish as the patient 
ages. The main recommendation when attempting to treat 
and prevent panosteitis is ensuring that affected dogs and at-
risk puppies are fed an appropriate, complete, and balanced 
large-breed puppy diet without excessive protein.
4.2.5 Prognosis
Prognosis is generally good to excellent. Few dogs have 
long-term ramifications from panosteitis.
4.3 Avascular necrosis of the femoral head
Avascular necrosis of the femoral head—also known as 
Legg-Calvé-Perthes disease and osteochondritis dissecans 
of the femoral head—is characterized as noninflammatory 
local ischemia of the femoral head and neck, resulting in 
deformation and lameness. The vascular nature of this dis -
ease is suspected due to pathologic changes, which include 
necrosis of the trabecular bone followed by fragmentation 
after continued loading of the joint. The bilateral disease 
occurs in 12% to 16.5% of dogs (Towle and Breur, 2012).
4.3.1 Signalment
Most dogs present between 4 and 11  months of age, and 
there is no sex predilection. Small-breed dogs are most 
commonly affected, with toy and terrier breeds being at in-
creased risk. Due to the strong breed predilection, a heredi-
tary component is suspected. In miniature poodles and West 
Highland white terriers, the trait is autosomal recessive; 
therefore, owners of affected puppies should be counseled 
against breeding.
4.3.2 Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on signalment, history, physical ex -
amination findings, and radiographic findings. Physical 
examination findings include a mild to severe, non-weight-
bearing lameness of the pelvic limbs. Mild cases may be 
subclinical; therefore, careful and thorough orthopedic 
examination is essential. Radiographs are usually diagnos -
tic, but some chondrodystrophic breeds are challenging. 
Computed tomography (CT) may be advised. Similarly, 
flexed ventrodorsal (“frog-leg”) radiography of the hip/pel-
vis may be preferred to the traditional extended-hip radiog-
raphy. Radiography or CT shows progressive radiopacity of 
the lateral epiphyseal area of the femoral head, followed by 
lysis of the femoral head in a “motheaten” or “apple-core” 
appearance. After lysis, the femoral head flattens, creating 
the potential for femoral neck fractures.
4.3.3 Differential diagnoses
Differential diagnoses include capital physeal trauma, 
epiphysitis, septic physitis, osteomyelitis, and neoplasia.
4.3.4 Treatment
In less than 25% of cases, lameness resolves with rest and 
NSAID therapy ( Kustritz, 2007). With this in mind, avas -
cular necrosis of the femoral head is most often considered 
a surgical disease. Surgical options are femoral head and 
neck ostectomy or total hip replacement. Given the lytic ap-
pearance of the femoral head, samples should be submit -
ted for culture and histopathologic assessment to rule out 
osteomyelitis and neoplasia. After femoral head and neck 
ostectomy, early return to function and aggressive physical 
rehabilitation is not only encouraged but essential to a suc -
cessful outcome.
4.3.5 Prognosis
Postoperative prognosis is good, with lameness resolving in 
84% to 100% of cases (Kustritz, 2007). Physical rehabilita-
tion after surgery may help ensure a positive outcome.
4.4 Multiple cartilaginous exostosis
Multiple cartilaginous exostosis—also known as osteo -
chondromatosis and multiple hereditary osteochondromata 
(or osteochondroma, if singular)—is a benign bone disease 
of multiple, cartilage-capped bony protuberances that arise 
from the surface of any bone formed by endochondral os -
sification. The bones most frequently affected are vertebrae, 
ribs, and long bones. The cause is unknown, and the condi-
tion may affect both dogs and cats. Exostosis may undergo 
malignant transformation to chondrosarcoma or osteosar -
coma (Doige et al., 1978).
4.4.1 Signalment
There are no known sex or breed predilections, although 
Great Danes, Saint Bernards, and Hounds appear overrepre-
sented. In dogs, the disease is inherited as an autosomal dom-
inant trait and is seen in young, growing patients. Exostosis 
appears and enlarges before skeletal maturity. In cats, the 
disease has been associated with the feline leukemia virus. 
Exostosis occurs more commonly after skeletal maturity.

Musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats  Chapter | 22  325
4.4.2 Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on physical examination and radio -
graphic findings, with excisional biopsy and histologic 
examination important for definitive diagnosis. Physical 
examination findings depend on the location of the lesions 
and may indicate interference with locomotion. Pain may 
be present if exostosis is associated with a tendon, ligament, 
vessel, or spinal cord compression. Radiographic findings 
include single or multiple bony masses with a thin cortex 
and a medullary cavity that is confluent with the host bone 
and has a distinct trabecular pattern. In dogs, growth of 
the exostosis should cease with the closure of the adjacent 
growth plate, and, in animals diagnosed with exostosis, full-
body radiography is recommended as a monitoring tool.
4.4.3 Treatment
Treatment depends on the size and location of the lesion and 
associated clinical signs. Nonsurgical management may be 
attempted and includes rest and NSAID analgesics. Surgical 
management is often indicated for single or large exostosis, 
specifically those compressing the spinal cord.
4.4.4 Prognosis
Prognosis depends on the site and size of the lesions, 
ranging from excellent to guarded. In dogs, the prognosis 
is better if lesions stop increasing in size at the cessation 
of growth. After malignant transformation, the prognosis 
may be poor, depending on the location and type of tumor 
(Doige et al., 1978).
4.5 Slipped capital femoral epiphysis
Slipped capital femoral epiphysis—also known as femoral 
neck metaphyseal osteopathy, spontaneous femoral capital 
physeal fracture, and femoral capital physeal dysplasia syn-
drome—is nontraumatic, slow, progressive displacement of 
the proximal femoral metaphysis from the femoral epiph -
ysis through the physis. This disease is most common in 
cats but has also been reported in dogs, and the cause is 
unknown. It is not the same disease as a Salter-Harris type 
1 fracture of the femoral capital physis, which is acute and 
traumatic in origin. Signalment The most common age at 
presentation is 4.5 to 42  months. Maine coon and Siamese 
cats may be overrepresented; in one study, Maine coon cats 
were 12 times more likely than other breeds to develop this 
condition (Borak et al., 2015 ). Overweight, neutered male 
cats appear to be at risk (Towle and Breur, 2012).
4.5.1 Diagnosis
Diagnosis is based on signalment, history, physical examina-
tion findings, and radiographic findings. History and physi-
cal examination findings include acute or chronic pelvic limb 
lameness, pain on manipulation of the coxofemoral joint, and 
an inability to jump. Approximately one-quarter of cases are 
bilateral. Radiographic findings include a widening and lat-
eral displacement of the capital femoral growth plate with 
progressive resorption and sclerosis of the femoral neck.
4.5.2 Treatment
Surgical treatment is indicated and results in better long-
term outcome than medical management. Early in the dis -
ease process, reduction with internal fixation is possible 
with the use of multiple divergent wires to stabilize the 
physis. With more chronic disease, femoral head and neck 
ostectomy or total hip replacement is indicated. Among sur-
gical patients, post-discharge analgesia may consist of sub-
lingual buprenorphine or oral tramadol. After femoral head 
and neck ostectomy, early return to function and aggressive 
physical rehabilitation should be encouraged and are essen-
tial to a successful outcome.
4.5.3 Prognosis
Prognosis with surgical treatment, assuming no surgical 
complications, is good with primary fixation in acute cases 
or femoral head and neck ostectomy or total hip replace -
ment in chronic cases ( Fischer et  al., 2004 ; Liska et  al., 
2009). Complications associated with a particular surgery 
are outside the scope of this article and should be completely 
discussed with the owner before surgery. Physical rehabili-
tation after surgery may help ensure a positive outcome.
5 Joint disorders in dogs
Bones together form joints. Joint diseases are more prone 
due to damage or disorders that affect membrane, ligament, 
cartilage, and bone. In a joint, the ends of the bone are cov-
ered with cartilage and it helps in reducing the friction of 
the joint as it moves. The joints that are susceptible are hip 
joint, shoulder joint, knee (patellar luxation) joint, elbow 
joint, tarsal joint, and carpal joint. The musculoskeletal 
system comprises two types of muscles. They are smooth 
and skeletal muscles. Skeletal muscles are responsible for 
posture and movement, whereas the smooth muscle is re -
sponsible for facilitating the flow of blood and movement 
of food along the digestive tract. Tendons attach each end 
of a muscle to a bone. They are tough bands of connec -
tive tissue made up of a protein called collagen. They are 
located within sheaths. Ligaments connect one bone to an -
other. They surround joints which helps to support them. 
Ligaments are tough cords formed of connective tissue.
5.1 Clinical signs of musculoskeletal disorders
1. Weakness
2. Lameness

326 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
3. Limb swelling and
4. Joint dysfunction
Problems with muscles and skeleton include other dys -
function of other organ systems like urinary, digestive, 
and circulatory systems.
5.2 Lameness examination
Lameness examination is done when the animal is at rest 
and while in movement. If the animal is lame by the fore -
limb it puts its head up while putting weight on the fore -
limb and even the stride is also shortened. If the hind limb 
is lame, the animal drops its head while putting weight on 
the hindlimb. X-ray and ultrasonography can be used to 
diagnose lameness. An advanced diagnostic technique like 
arthroscopy is used. It is a minor surgery in which a flex -
ible tube called an endoscope is fixed. It is a noninvasive 
technique used for the diagnosis of lameness in animals. 
Animals were also examined for swelling, pain, instability, 
a grating or crackling sound, reduced range of motion, and 
wasting away of muscle.
6 Congenital musculoskeletal disorder
Abnormalities of the musculoskeletal system may be con -
genital (present at birth) or genetic (inherited) which may 
be neurologic in origin (Hanson, 2022)
(A) Dyschondroplasia: It is one of the hereditary skeletal 
disorders in which bones of the limbs or trunk and 
head are underdeveloped or deformed. It is commonly 
reported in Poodles and Scottish terriers in which the 
location of the lesion is limb and trunk or head, whereas 
the trunk and head are commonly affected in Alaskan 
malamutes, Basset Hounds, and Dachshunds. Among 
the breeds, affected malamutes will have a deficiency 
of red blood cells (anemia).
(B) Myopathies (muscular dystrophy) : Male dogs are 
commonly affected. Signs include muscular weaken -
ing, difficulty in swallowing, stiff gait, and loss of mus-
cle mass (Fig. 4). It is caused by a lack of protein that is 
responsible for the functioning of muscle membrane.
(C) Glycogen storage disease (glycogenosis): Glycogen is 
a complex carbohydrate that is normally stored in liver 
and muscles. The body converts glucose as a source of 
energy.
Common symptoms include
● Appetite loss
● Weakness and lethargy
● Enlarged liver
● Collapse
● Inability to get up
● Death
(D) Hip dysplasia: It is a common developmental disorder 
of the hip joint. This disorder can be congenital or in -
herited in many large breed dogs (Harari, 2022) (Fig. 3)
Common symptoms include
● Painful hips
● Bunny hopping
● Difficulty standing
● Difficulty climbing stairs or jumping
● Lameness
● Inability to exercise
● Loss of muscle mass in hind limbs
● Decreased range of motion
(E) Osteochondrosis: It is observed in young aged 
(4–8 months) large breed dogs. It affects joints of the 
shoulder, elbow, knee, and tarsal joints in order. In this 
disorder, the immature joint cartilage may get separated 
from the bone. The separated cartilage may float freely 
and cause inflammation and improper bone formation.
Common symptoms include
● Drooling more than usual
● Swallowing difficulty
● Stiffness
● Weakness
● Enlarged tongue
● Loss of muscle mass
● Tremors
● Deformed limbs
● Flat feet
● Resistant to exercise
FIG. 4 Dog showing generalized emaciation—hind bound condition.

Musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats  Chapter | 22  327
(F) Osteogenesis imperfecta : The long bones are more 
commonly affected and they tend to be fragile and 
loose joints. The cornea of the eye will have most prob-
ably a bluish tinge.
Common symptoms include
● Depression
● Reluctance to play
● Swollen joints
● Painful joints
● Grinding sound in the joints
● Stiffness
● Loss of muscle mass
● Lameness
(G) Osteopetrosis: It is a rare inherited disease that occurs 
in dogs. This shows signs of shortening of lower jaw, 
impacted molar teeth, and fragile long bones. Long 
bones including the skull replaced by a spongy type of 
bone instead of bone marrow.
(H) Miscellaneous
(a) Some dogs born without a feet—apodia
(b) without a certain bone in the limb—hemimelia
(c) Dogs born with split or missing toes—Lobster 
claw defect or ectrodactyly syndrome
(d) Dogs born with extra toes—polydactyly
(e) Dogs born with fused toes—syndactyly
7 Immune-mediated arthritis
Immune-mediated arthritis is comprised of a group of inflam-
matory but noninfectious affections of joints which respond 
to immunosuppressive therapy (Kohn, 2007). Inflammation 
is either due to the persistence of an antigenic material in 
the synovium of affected joints, possibly as sequel to previ-
ous infection, or to the deposition of immune complexes in 
synovium, derived from inflammatory lesions elsewhere in 
the body. Immune-mediated arthritis is typically a polyar -
thritis involving more than one joint. It is common in dogs 
and cats and is characterized by the major involvement of 
joints of locomotion. Idiopathic polyarthritis, systemic lupus 
erythematous (SLE) associated polyarthritis, drug-induced 
polyarthritis, polyarthritis of Greyhounds, and rheumatoid 
arthritis are some of the examples of polyarthritis most com-
monly reported in dogs (Thompson, 2005; Day and Bennett, 
2008). Immune-mediated arthritides have been categorized 
into erosive and nonerosive arthritis based on radiographic 
changes observed in joints and bone (Bennett, 2005).
7.1 Myopathies
Disease that causes damage to muscle or tissue is observed 
(Fig. 5). It can be congenital ( Fig. 6) or due to nutritional 
imbalances, injury, metabolic disturbances, tumor, or poi -
soning (Harari, 2022).
(A) Labrador retriever myopathy: It occurs in Labrador 
(yellow and black) under 5  months old. Signs include 
muscle wasting ( Figs.  7 and 8 ), stunted growth, and 
weakness. A definitive diagnosis includes urine test, 
muscle biopsy, and electromyography. Supplementation 
with l-carnitine may cause improvement in comfort of 
the animal.
FIG. 5 Dog showing muscular dystrophy of temporal muscle (myopathy).
FIG. 6 Congenital abnormality.

328 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
(B) Great Dane myopathy : Occurs in young Great 
Dane dogs. Signs include weakness, muscle wasting 
(Fig. 9), and muscle tremors after exercise. Definitive 
diagnosis includes blood test, muscle biopsy, and 
electromyography.
(C) Fibrotic myopathy: In this condition, normal tissue is 
replaced by thick connective tissues and degeneration 
of thigh muscles occurs. The cause is not known but 
the signs include permanent abnormal tightening, and 
lameness without pain.
(D) Myositis ossificans: It is a muscle disorder in which 
noncancerous bony deposits occur in the muscles and 
connective tissues. The cause is unknown. Dobermann 
pinschers are commonly affected especially the hip 
joint. Surgical removal of the bony mass is suggested.
(E) Polymyositis: It is an immune-mediated disor -
der which affects the adult dogs. It includes disease 
conditions like lupus erythematosus and myasthe -
nia gravis. Signs include depression, lack of energy, 
weakness, lameness, weight loss, muscle tenderness 
or pain, and wasting of muscles. Definitive diagnosis 
includes blood test, electromyography, and muscle bi-
opsy. Corticosteroids are used for treatment to cause 
immunosuppression.
(F) Masticatory myositis: It is an inflammatory condition 
of masticatory muscle. The exact cause is unknown. It 
can be due to autoimmune conditions. In acute cases, 
the animal has difficulty in opening jaw due to swol -
len muscles. In chronic cases in addition to these mus-
cle wasting and inappetence and weight loss will be 
present.
Diagnosis by blood tests and electromyography, if 
necessary skin biopsy and corticosteroid therapy can 
be given.
(G) Malignant hyperthermia: It is common in pigs and 
Greyhounds. It occurs due to inhalant anesthetics and 
stress. Signs include tachycardia, hyperpnoea, fever, 
muscle rigidity, and tightness. Fluid therapy, ice pack 
application, muscle relaxant, and corticosteroid can be 
given.
(H) Exertional myopathy (rhabdomyolysis) : This oc -
curs in heavy-working species like dogs. Insufficient 
blood supply to muscles after exercise leads to rhab -
domyolysis. Muscle pain and swelling after heavy 
exercise. Treatment includes fluid therapy, icepack 
application, muscle relaxant, and bicarbonates can be 
supplemented.
FIG. 7 Labrador retriever myopathy—Labrador showing muscle wast -
ing in temporal muscle.
FIG. 8 Dog showing generalized emaciation—musculoskeletal disorder.
FIG. 9 Native breed showing temporal muscle wasting and dystrophy.

Musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats  Chapter | 22  329
(I) Muscular or tendon trauma : Injury of muscle and 
associated tendons can cause myopathy in dogs.
● Abnormal contracture of shoulder muscles : 
Infraspinatus muscle contracture leads to tight -
ening of one or both shoulders. It occurs due to 
trauma and causes pain, lameness, and swelling of 
shoulder joint. The lameness is temporary, but a 
characteristic abnormal gait develops 2 to 4 weeks 
after injury. Other signs include the pulling in of the 
elbow toward the body, pulling away of the foreleg 
from the body, and external rotation of the carpus. 
The limb is moved in a circular motion with each 
stride of the leg. Treatment consists of the surgical 
removal of a portion of the muscle, including the 
cutting of a tendon. Limb and joint functions usu -
ally improve immediately following surgery, and 
the outlook for full recovery is excellent.
● Injury to biceps brachii tendon: It usually affects 
mature, large dogs. The injury may be direct, in -
direct, or due to overuse or migration of bone and 
cartilage fragments called joint mice . Persistent 
lameness worsens over time. The shoulder joint’s 
range of motion is reduced, and the shoulder muscles 
may waste away. Applying pressure to the biceps 
tendon while bending and extending the shoulder 
joint causes severe pain. X-rays and ultrasonography 
are often used to help confirm the diagnosis. In mild 
cases, the recommended treatments are rest and non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs given by mouth. 
Severe cases can be treated with injections of an 
anti-inflammatory agent and rest. Chronic cases that 
are resistant to treatment of multiple corticosteroid 
injections or cases involving joint mice are treated 
through surgery. The outlook for recovery is good, 
although severe degeneration in long-term cases 
may cause lameness to persist after treatment.
● Quadriceps contracture (stiff stifle disease) : 
Tightening of the quadriceps muscles develops 
after improperly performed surgical operations 
mostly on young dogs. The bone, the connective 
tissue surrounding the bone, and the quadriceps 
muscles bond together. This leads to extension 
and disuse of the limb, porous and easily broken 
bones (osteoporosis), osteoarthritis, and bone and 
joint deformations. The affected limb is overex -
tended and often displaced. Surgery is usually re -
quired to remove the fibrous tissues that connect 
the bone and muscles and to restore motion in the 
stifle joint. Reconstruction of bone and soft tissues 
should be followed by the application of bandages 
that restrict the mobility of the joint. Physical ther-
apy is usually required after surgery. The outlook 
for recovery is guarded. Careful surgical repair of 
bone fractures can help prevent this condition.
● Achilles tendon disruption (dropped hock): This 
injury to the common Achilles tendon often affects 
working and athletic dogs. It is usually the result 
of trauma. The tendon can be partially or com -
pletely ruptured or torn away from the bone. Signs 
include a severe lameness that keeps the animal 
from putting weight on the leg, excessive bend -
ing of the tarsus (ankle), and a stance in which the 
heel touches the ground. Swelling, pain, and torn 
or thickened tendon ends may also be seen. X-rays 
are useful for diagnosis and may reveal fragments 
torn from the bone.
● Iliopsoas muscle trauma : Trauma to the muscle 
or tendon of the iliopsoas muscle (a pelvic muscle) 
can cause sudden or long-term lameness in active 
dogs. The injury can be diagnosed based on a vet-
erinarian’s exam findings, X-rays, and ultrasound 
findings. Treatment usually includes rest and non-
steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.
● Muscle tumors : It can be benign or malignant 
(cancerous). Malignant can spread to nearby 
muscle and clot and induce lameness. It can cause 
lameness and swelling diagnosis by tissue biopsy. 
Based on the type of tumor, chemotherapy and ra-
diation are given (Harari, 2022).
8 Canine diskospondylitis
Canine diskospondylitis is a disease that causes progres -
sive destruction of intervertebral disks and end plates and is 
usually caused by bacteria and is sometimes accompanied 
by neurologic deficits ( Figs. 10 and 11 ). It occurs in large 
and giant breed dogs ( Kornegay and Barber, 1980 ). Often 
males are more commonly affected than females. No age 
FIG. 10 Hindlimb LMN lesion.

330 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 predisposition often occurs from 3  months to 20  years old 
dogs (Kornegay et al., 1979; Weitkamp, 1982).
Clinical signs include recurrent episodes of pain, fever, 
weight loss, and paresis or paralysis ( Figs. 12–16; Hurov 
et  al., 1978). Diagnosis by spinal radiography affects the 
spinal column from L7 through 51, L1 through L2, T13 
through Ll, and C6 through C7 ( Kornegay et  al., 1979 ). 
FIG. 11 Hindlimb—LMN signs.
FIG. 12 Dobermann showing C1-C5 lesions—spastic paralysis of all limbs.
FIG. 13 Radial nerve paralysis.
FIG. 14 Spitz showing forelimb radial nerve paralysis.
FIG. 15 Daschund dog showing peroneal nerve paralysis.

Musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats  Chapter | 22  331
Medical management requires respective antimicrobial 
therapy against causative agents for a prolonged period of 
time. Surgical management is not recommended often.
9 Therapy for musculoskeletal system 
disorder
General application of acutherapy with emphasis on the 
musculoskeletal system and associated pain where it is most 
applied (Alimi et al., 2020).
There are 14 major meridian systems through which the 
energy (Chi) flows and which bear the 361 acupoints in the 
body where meridians are stimulated to either block or re -
lease the energy flow through acupressure or acupuncture 
(Xie and Rimar, 1994; Xie and Ortiz-Umpierre, 2006). These 
meridian systems are shown in Table 1 (Fig. 17 and Table 2).
9.1 Applications in the musculoskeletal system
Acupuncture has gotten wide acceptance as a noninvasive 
and less risky therapy for mitigating aches and inflamma -
tion through the stimulation release of neurochemicals and 
modulators (Han and Terenius, 1982; Zijlstra et al., 2003 ). 
Acupressure relieves pain and inflammation in muscles 
and joints by causing the secretion of natural painkillers 
(Utzerath, 2014). In many species of animals, it is,  therefore, 
an alternative therapy to musculoskeletal disorders ( Choi, 
2009; Crouch, 2009 ; Koski, 2011 ) with no radiographic 
improvement in the condition but marked clinical improve-
ment and success (Choi et al., 2016).
10 Musculoskeletal disorders of cats
Musculoskeletal disorders are based on injury to muscles, 
bones, and tendons. A cat’s ability to see, breathe, urinate, 
and eat, all rely on muscles, joints, and bones. That is why 
it is highly detrimental in dogs.
10.1 Inherited and developmental disorders
Rickets: Rickets is a disorder that occurs due to an absolute 
deficiency of vitamin D and low or normal calcium levels. 
Cats are unable to synthesize vitamin D (Cholecalciferol) in 
their skin when exposed to sunlight and so are reliant on an 
adequate dietary intake.
The main causes of bone disorders are dietary and ge -
netic imbalances.
10.2 Bone disorders in cats
Common bone disorders as follows.
10.2.1 Osteochondromatosis (multiple 
exostoses)
Multiple bony growths that arise from the surface of the 
long bones, and vertebrae.
FIG. 16 German shepherd pup showing spinal injury indicates hind limb 
UMN lesions.
TABLE 1 The 14 meridians and their abbreviations.
Meridian Abbreviation
Lung LU
Heart HT
Pericardium PC
Spleen SP
Kidney KI
Liver LIV
Large intestine LI
Small intestine SI
Triple heater TH
Stomach ST
Bladder BL
Gallbladder GB
Governing vessels GV
Conception vessels CV

332 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
10.2.2 Scottish fold osteodystrophy
This breed is more prone to deformities of the spine and 
paws due to developmental growth.
10.2.3 Osteomyelitis
It is inflammation of the bone caused by a bacterial infec -
tion that spreads to the bloodstream. Treatment with antibi-
otics will reduce the infection.
10.2.4 Nutritional osteopathy
It occurs due to nutritional imbalance and disturbances. 
There will be reduced bone mass, deformities, growths, 
fractures, and lose teeth.
10.3 Joint disorders in cats
These disorders may be present at birth or due to environ -
mental factors.
10.3.1 Patellar luxation (knee cap 
displacement)
It is a hereditary disorder in which knee malformation 
occurs.
10.3.2 Hip dysplasia
Abnormal development of hip joint which is prone to ar -
thritis. Lifestyle changes and weight management can mini-
mize the condition.
10.3.3 Osteoarthritis
It is a serious and irreversible condition that requires 
immediate treatment. Joint cartilage degenerates over 
time and leads to increased pain and loss of movement 
(Fig.  18). Osteoarthritis is the most common form of 
 arthritis that  affects synovial joints in mammalian spe -
cies ( Nganvongpanit et  al., 2017 ; Johnson et  al., 2016 ; 
Rothschild and Woods, 2012 ). Previously osteoarthritis 
has been termed osteoarthrosis, degenerative joint disease 
(DJD), degenerative arthritis, and arthritis deformans with 
varying specificity. Osteoarthritis is a disorder involving 
movable joints characterized by cell stress and extracellu -
lar matrix degradation initiated by micro- and macro-injury 
that activates maladaptive repair responses including pro-
inflammatory pathways of innate immunity. The disease 
manifests first as a molecular derangement (abnormal joint 
tissue metabolism) followed by anatomic, and/or physio -
logic derangements (characterized by cartilage degradation, 
bone remodeling, osteophyte formation, joint inflamma -
tion, and loss of normal joint function), that can culminate 
in illness (Kraus et al., 2015).
10.4 Muscle disorders in cat
10.4.1 Myopathies
Myopathies are disorders that affect cat’s muscle mem -
branes or fibers. The cause may be hereditary, trauma or 
injury, nutritional imbalances, poisoning, cancer, inflamma-
tory conditions, or metabolic disturbances (Fig. 19).
10.4.2 Myositides
Myositides are diseases that create inflammatory reactions 
in the muscles. These are caused by infections, parasitic dis-
eases, and immunity conditions.
10.4.3 Y ellow fat disease (steatitis)
Inflammation of fatty tissues due to excessive unsaturated 
fatty acids and vitamin E deficit diet. Management in -
cludes nutritional and dietary supplements along with pain 
medication.
FIG. 17 Acupressure points.

Musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats  Chapter | 22  333
TABLE 2 Some selected acupoints, locations, and clinical applications involving musculoskeletal disorders.
Acupoints Location Clinical applications
LI-1 Proximal to the coronary band at the craniomedial aspect of the 
hoof of the forelimb
Lameness of the forelimb, laminitis, navicular 
disease, pharyngitis, nasal discharge
LI-3 Over the interosseous muscle on the craniomedial aspect of the 
fetlock, distal to the end of the second metacarpal
Toothache, inflammation of tendon, fetlock pain
LI-4 Between the second and third metacarpal bones at the medial 
aspect of the forelimb at about proximal one-third of the 
distance between the carpus and fetlock
Immunosuppression, nose bleeding, facial paralysis, 
tendinitis, dental disorders, sore throat
LI-15 Located at the shoulder region on the cranial margin of the 
acromial head of the deltoideus, cranial and distal to the 
acromion process
IVDD, cervical pain, shoulder pain, and lameness
ST-31 Caudoventral to the tuber coxae in the depression at its lower 
border
Arthritis or pain of the stifle, colic
ST-34 Belly of vastus lateralis, proximal and lateral to the patella Hind limb paralysis, inflammation of the stifle
ST-35 The depression lateral and distal to the patellar ligament and 
patella, respectively
Ligament disorders, pain, and osteoarthritis of stifle, 
paresis of pelvic limb
ST-41 Between the long and lateral digital extensor at the ventral edge 
of the lateral malleolus
Hind limb paralysis, constipation
SP-9 The depression about the level of the ligament of the patellar in 
front of the saphenous vein
Arthritis and pain of the stifle, jaundice, stranguria
SP-21 About same level of the point of shoulder on the lateral thorax 
at seventh intercostal space
Generalized body pain, dyspnea, digestive disorders, 
fore, and hind limb weakness
BL-11 Few distances away from the dorsal midline at the level of the 
second thoracic vertebral space
Stiffness of the cervical vertebrae, forelimb paralysis, 
arthritis, IVDD
BL-37 At the level of the tuber ischia in the groove between the 
semitendinosus and biceps femoris muscles
Lameness of hip, stifle, and hock origin, hind limb 
paralysis, muscle atrophy
TH-5 In the interosseous space of radius and ulna on the lateral 
surface of the fore limb, a bit proximal to the carpus
IVDD, fever, otitis, cervical pain
TH-9 At the terminal of the groove between the lateral ulnaris and the 
common digital extensor muscle
Paralysis, general analgesia point
GB-29 In the depression halfway between the greater trochanter of the 
femur and iliac wing
Hip dysplasia, coxofemoral joint arthritis, hind limb 
paralysis or pain
GB-30 Between the greater trochanter of the femur and ischial 
tuberosity in the depression about the mid-way
Coxofemoral osteoarthritis, pain of the gluteus, hind 
limb paralysis, or paresis
LIV-3 Proximal one-third of the distance from the tarsus to fetlock on 
the craniomedial surface of the third metatarsus
Paralysis of hind limb, fetlock pain
SI-3 On the lateral aspect of the fifth metacarpal proximal to the 
metacarpophalangeal joint
Thoracolumbar pain, IVDD, shoulder pain, 
pharyngitis
SI-9 The depression at the junction of the lateral and ling heads 
of triceps brachii with the deltoidues muscle caudal to the 
humerus
Paresis or paralysis of the forelimb, generalized pain
KID-7 On the cranial border of the Achilles tendon at the caudomedial 
surface of the hind limb
Varying edema, paralysis, or paresis of the hind limb
Adapted from Hulea, C.I., Cristina, R.T., 2012. Acupuncture as a therapeutic tool in health disorders in animals: a review. J. Anim. Sci. Biotechnol. 45(2), 
166–177; Xie, H., Preast, V., 2007. Xie’s Veterinary Acupuncture, Blackwell Publishing, Oxford, UK.

334 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
10.4.4 Hypokalemic polymyopathy
A muscle weakness due to potassium deficiency
10.4.5 Muscle tumors
Benign and cancerous spread and invade nearby muscles. 
Management by surgery, amputation, chemotherapy, and 
radiation.
11 Diagnosis and treatment of 
musculoskeletal disorders in dogs and 
cats
In all cases of musculoskeletal pain and lameness, diagnos-
tic procedures to determine the nature, extent, and exact lo-
cation of the injury must be performed. Evaluation of the 
source of pain and lameness always starts with a thorough 
history, inspection, and physical examination to look for 
sources of heat, swelling, and pain on manual palpation. In 
horses, hoof testers should be applied to determine whether 
pain can be elicited from structures within the hoof cap -
sule. Next, the gait and locomotion of the animal are evalu-
ated. In a weight-bearing lameness, the lame leg always 
bears less weight and often has a shorter duration of bearing 
weight. In swinging leg lameness, the lame leg abducts or 
adducts to avoid flexion of a painful joint. These findings 
can be measured objectively using a force plate or a com -
puterized gait analysis system. In horses, flexion tests of 
joints followed immediately by gait evaluation at a trot may 
help localize pain.
After determining which limb is lame, diagnostic anal -
gesia (intra-articular or perineural) can be used to localize 
the painful gait to a specific anatomic structure or a region 
of the affected limb. After localization, diagnostic imag -
ing techniques can be performed to evaluate the soft-tissue 
structures and bones. These diagnostic imaging procedures 
include radiography, ultrasonography, MRI, CT, nuclear 
imaging, and thermography. When joint sepsis is suspected, 
synovial fluid analysis of affected joints is necessary for di-
agnosis. After these procedures, a diagnosis can be made, 
treatment instituted, and a prognosis given based on the di-
agnosis, extent of disease, and expected response to therapy 
(Adams, 2022).
Diagnosis includes a regular examination of the follow-
ing factors
1. An orthopedic exam
2. An assessment of body and muscle condition
3. X-rays to see what joints and spines really look like
4. Blood work to evaluate the function of internal organs
FIG. 18 Cat showing hemiparesis.
FIG. 19 Kitten showing lower motor neuron hindlimb lesion.

Musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats  Chapter | 22  335
11.1 Diagnostic approach
In juvenile patients, determining the correct diagnosis can be 
challenging because the clinician must understand developmen-
tal physiology (Tables 3 and 4) and how errors in development 
affect particular body systems. To properly diagnose juvenile 
orthopedic disease, it is important to obtain key information:
● Patient signalment: Age, breed, and sex.
● Accurate history, including:
● Origin of the dog, which can indicate the general 
care the dam and puppies received.
● History of any known trauma, which can help deter-
mine the presence of fractures or soft tissue injuries.
11.2 Therapeutic management
Adams (2022)  explained therapeutic options for diseases 
of the musculoskeletal system include rest, restricted or 
modified activity, immobilization of diseased or injured 
structures in splints and casts, NSAIDs, corticosteroid 
administration, physical therapy, acupuncture, extracorpo -
real shock wave therapy, and surgical repair. Therapeutic 
options for the management of musculoskeletal disorders 
have greatly expanded recently with the use of regenera -
tive medicine, in which growth factors and mesenchymal 
cell therapy have been used to augment healing. A return 
to a useful life for many animals is possible when diagno -
sis and subsequent treatment are done early in the disease 
process.
The treatment regimen includes modalities like:
1. Class IV K-laser therapy: Laser therapy speeds up the 
healing process and treats pain, swelling, and infection.
TABLE 3 Approximate closure times of major growth 
plates in long bones of average (25 to 30 kg) dogs (Von 
Pfeil and Decamp, 2009).
Growth plate
Age at closure (months)
Earliest Latest
Hindlimb
Greater trochanter 6 11
Proximal femur 6 12
Distal femur 6 11
Proximal tibia 6 12
Tibial tuberosity 10 12
Distal tibia 5 11
Medial malleolus 4 5
Proximal fibula 6 11
Distal fibula 5 11
Tuber calcaneus 11 weeks 8
Forelimb
Supraglenoid tuberosity 12 weeks 5
Proximal humerus 10 12
Distal humerus 5 8
Proximal ulna 5 8
Anconeal process 4 5
Distal ulna 6 11
Proximal radius 5 8
Distal radius 6 11
TABLE 4 Approximate closure times of major growth 
plates in bones of average cats (Smith, 1969).
Growth plate
Age at closure (months)
Earliest Latest
Hindlimb
Proximal femur 8 14
Distal femur 14 20
Proximal tibia 14 20
Distal tibia 8 14
Proximal fibula 14 20
Distal fibula 8 14
Ilioischial 4 8
Forelimb
Proximal humerus 14 20
Distal humerus 4 8
Proximal ulna 8 14
Scapula 4 8
Distal ulna 14 20
Proximal radius 4 8
Distal radius 14 20
Spine 14 20

336 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 2. Massage: Just like people, pets love a massage! It de -
creases scar tissue formation and spasm while reliev -
ing pain.
 3. Therapeutic ultrasound: The application of deep ul -
trasound rays will heat up the muscles and tendons to 
relieve spasms and pain while increasing flexibility.
 4. Physical manipulation, joint mobility, and stretching
 5. Therapeutic exercises with the use of physioballs/pea-
nuts and wobble boards
 6. Electric stimulation (TENS/NMES)
 7. Cryotherapy
 8. Thermotherapy
 9. Stem cells
 10. Platelet-rich plasma
11.3 Ultrasonic beam therapy
A beam of pulsed ultrasound was used to treat musculoskel-
etal disorders in dogs and cats. Doses, which varied accord-
ing to the lesion, ranged from 0.2 to 3  watts/cm2 for 5  min 
in each treatment. In 63% of the cases, rapid and complete 
resolution occurred (Lang, 1980).

Musculoskeletal system in dogs and cats  Chapter | 22  337

339

Chapter 23
Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
The increasing longevity of companion animals, such as 
dogs and cats, is accompanied by a heightened susceptibil -
ity to a spectrum of geriatric diseases. This growing concern 
for pet health and wellness has garnered the attention of both 
pet owners and medical professionals, as well as research -
ers, who seek to comprehend the underlying mechanisms 
of geriatric diseases and develop efficacious treatments. 
With a better understanding and effective management of 
geriatric diseases, the quality of life for aging pets can be 
significantly enhanced.
Aging is a general term that refers to the natural, grad -
ual succession of life stages that start with conception and 
proceed through development, maturation, and senescence. 
However, the phrase is most frequently used more specifi -
cally to describe the complex combination of biological 
changes that take place in elderly individuals and gradually 
lessen their capacity to maintain homeostasis when sub -
jected to internal physiological and external environmental 
stimuli. These modifications ultimately result in diminished 
vitality, greater susceptibility to illness, and ultimately mor-
tality. Age-related changes can sometimes be seen as advan-
tageous. For instance, older dogs and cats frequently exhibit 
good manners and have ingrained habits. Other changes that 
occur, like the graying of the muzzle or a mild decline in 
physical activity, are neither good nor bad. Changes brought 
on by disease, altered mobility, or the emergence of behav-
ioral issues are fewer desirable changes.
Age-related health problems in dogs and cats are be -
coming more and more prevalent. The geriatric population 
has particular demands and is more likely to have chronic 
ailment. However, there is very few scientific data avail -
able on physical examination impairments in this age range 
(Table 1). In primary care, 30%–40% of patients are elderly 
pets, and as dogs and cats live longer, this percentage is 
anticipated to rise. The aging process is accompanied by 
a decline in various physiological functions, leading to the 
development of age-associated diseases. In dogs and cats, 
cognitive decline is one of the most common and debili -
tating geriatric diseases, affecting memory, attention, and 
other cognitive functions. Arthritis is another common ge -
riatric disease, causing pain, inflammation, and mobility 
issues in affected animals. Heart disease, dental problems, 
and kidney disease are also prevalent in geriatric pets and 
can have serious consequences if left untreated.
The onset of geriatric diseases in pets is a result of a 
combination of factors; however, recent progress in veteri -
nary medicine has shed light on the intricate mechanisms 
that contribute to these conditions. This has led to innova -
tive and effective treatments that can improve the quality 
of life of our aging companions. One such example is the 
implementation of neuroprotective strategies like proper 
nutrition, physical activity, and mental stimulation, which 
have demonstrated success in reducing age-related cogni -
tive decline in both dogs and cats. As well, improvements 
in the diagnosis and management of diseases like arthritis, 
heart disease, and other common geriatric diseases have sig-
nificantly enhanced the well-being of senior pets.
2 Neural basis of cognitive decline  
in domestic dogs and cats during aging
Cognition, or the mental processes of perception, attention, 
learning, memory, and decision-making, is a vital aspect of 
animal behavior and welfare. Cognitive decline is a ubiqui-
tous phenomenon that occurs because of aging and affects a 
wide range of species, including our beloved domestic dogs 
and cats. These species are among the most popular pet 
choices, and their health and well-being are of paramount 
importance to pet owners, animal welfare organizations, 
and veterinary practitioners.

340  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
2.1 Brain structure and function in aging
The investigation of alterations in cerebral anatomy and 
function during the aging process in canines and felines is 
crucial for the advancement of our understanding of aging 
(Hoffman et al., 2019 ). Such studies can provide valuable 
insights into the aging process and serve as the foundation 
for the development of therapeutic strategies aimed at miti-
gating age-related diseases in our companion animals.
The neuroanatomical structure of aging canines and fe -
lines exhibits morphological alterations paralleling those 
observed in human aging (Head et al., 2000). Specifically, a 
reduction in brain volume and neuronal density is observed, 
as well as an elevation in the quantity of glial cells. This 
decrease in brain volume may have a negative impact on 
cognitive functions such as memory retention, attentional 
processes, and learning ability. Furthermore, fluctuations 
in neurotransmitter levels and the appearance of amyloid 
plaques may also contribute to the decline in cognitive ca -
pacity (Cotman et al., 2002).
In addition to alterations in brain structure and cogni -
tive function, aging dogs and cats exhibit modifications 
in sensory processing as well. One prevalent age-related  
alteration is hearing loss in both species, while changes in 
the retina can result in vision impairment ( Cavanagh et al., 
2016). The examination of brain structure and function in 
aging dogs and cats holds significance not only for advanc-
ing our comprehension of aging but also for the design of 
treatments for geriatric diseases.
The reduction in cognitive capacities among aging ca -
nine and feline populations is a ubiquitous aspect of the 
senescence process; however, it may also indicate the pres-
ence of neurological disorders, such as dementia (Landsberg 
et al., 2012 ). To accurately assess cognitive function, sci -
entists frequently employ behavioral assessments, includ -
ing the Canine Cognitive Dysfunction Assessment and the 
Feline Cognitive Function Assessment. These evaluations 
gauge various cognitive competencies, including memory, 
learning, attention, and problem-solving abilities.
3 Neural mechanisms underlying 
cognitive decline in aging
The exact neural mechanisms responsible for the cognitive 
decline observed in aging domestic dogs and cats remain 
unclear. Despite this, a growing body of research has pro -
posed several potential contributing factors, including oxi -
dative stress, neuroinflammation, and neurodegeneration 
(Chetboul et al., 2018; Zhou et al., 2019).
3.1 Inflammatory pathways: Linking chronic 
inflammation to age-related diseases
Inflammation, an intricate and multifaceted mechanism, 
plays a vital role in maintaining the body’s stability. In re -
cent times, numerous studies have revealed a correlation 
between persistent inflammation and various age-related 
illnesses in both human and animal populations. Chronic 
inflammation refers to a sustained state of low-level in -
flammation that arises due to prolonged exposure to vari -
ous environmental stressors such as pathogens, oxidative 
stressors, and metabolic by-products. This exposure results 
in the activation of pro-inflammatory cytokines, which play 
a crucial role in the development of chronic inflammation. 
Studies in geriatric canines and felines have demonstrated 
a correlation between chronic inflammation and the on -
set of age-associated disorders, including osteoarthritis, 
cardiovascular disease, renal dysfunction, and cognitive 
impairment.
3.2 Oxidative stress
Oxidative stress is a complex phenomenon that is character-
ized by an imbalance between the production of reactive 
oxygen species (ROS) and the body’s antioxidant defense 
mechanisms (Fig. 1). It arises when there is an excessive 
generation of ROS, leading to damage to cellular macro -
molecules such as DNA, proteins, and lipids. This damage 
can have a profound impact on cellular function and con -
tribute to the development of various diseases. Oxidative 
stress occurs due to a variety of factors, including expo -
sure to environmental toxins, poor dietary habits, and ag -
ing. Additionally, certain diseases and conditions, such as 
TABLE 1 Age-related changes in different body system.
S. No. Body system Changes with age
1. Gastrointestinal Lower esophageal resting 
pressure and hesitance of the 
sphincter
Decreased blood supply to 
the gut
Decreased motility of the 
esophagus, stomach, and 
intestines
2. Liver Liver mass and blood 
perfusion decreases
Decreased vascularity and 
excretory and re-absorptive 
capacities
Decreased urine-concentrating 
ability
3. Kidney Decreased weight and mass 
and protein binding of 
medications
4. Urine Increase in residual urine and 
reflux into ureters

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  341
cardiovascular disease, diabetes, and neurodegenerative 
disorders, can increase the production of ROS and amplify 
oxidative stress.
The mechanisms of oxidative stress have been exten -
sively studied and documented in the scientific literature. 
The generation of ROS through normal cellular processes, 
such as mitochondrial respiration, or through exogenous 
sources, such as exposure to ionizing radiation, has been 
well established ( Sies, 2017 ; Valko et  al., 2007). The in -
teraction of ROS with cellular macromolecules, including 
cellular membrane lipids, has been extensively studied, 
and the formation of lipid peroxidation products has been 
shown to contribute to oxidative stress and promote inflam-
mation (Sies, 2017; Valko et al., 2007). The impact of oxi -
dative stress on cellular proteins has also been documented, 
with protein carbonyls serving as markers of oxidative 
stress-induced protein damage (Davies, 2005; Dukan et al., 
2000). Finally, the impact of oxidative stress on DNA, and 
the formation of 8-oxo-dG, has been extensively studied in 
the context of cancer development and progression ( Cooke 
et al., 2003; Klaunig and Kamendulis, 2004) (Fig. 2).
3.2.1 Interventions to mitigate oxidative stress
Mitigatory strategies aimed at abating oxidative stress can be 
classified into two overarching modalities: those predicated 
on the utilization of antioxidants and those that do not entail 
the utilization of antioxidants. Antioxidant-centered interven-
tions encompass the augmentation of dietary antioxidants, 
for instance, vitamins C and E, beta-carotene, and selenium, 
as well as the administration of antioxidant enzymes, such as 
superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase, with the objective 
of elevating the body’s antioxidant defense mechanisms and 
reducing the concentration of reactive oxygen species (ROS).
In contrast, nonantioxidant-centered interventions 
aim to regulate the sources of ROS generation and abate 
oxidative stress by modulating specific cellular path -
ways. One example of such an intervention is the modu -
lation of the Nrf2 pathway, which has been demonstrated 
to increase the expression of antioxidant genes and abate 
Antioxidants
OXIDATIVE STRESS
FIG. 1 Generation of oxidative stress.
SOURCES
ENDOGENOUS
o Endoplasmic reticulum
o Cyclooxygenase
o Lipoxygenase
o Membrane bound 
NADPH oxidase
o Peroxisomes
o Electron transport chain
EXOGENOUS
o Air pollution
o U.V light
o Heavy metals: copper, 
cadmium, arsenic
o Ionizing radiation
o Cigarettes smoke
Less MoreROS
Antioxidant defense Pathogenesis
Enzymatic system
o SOD, CAT, GSH, GPx
Non-enzymatic system
o Glutathione, vitamins
o Cardiovascular
o Neurodegenerative
o Diabetes 
o Cancer
-O2
-OH
-RO
-ROOH
-NO2
-ONOO
H2O2 
-ROO
FIG. 2 Pathophysiology of oxidative stress.

342  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
oxidative stress. Moreover, interventions that target the 
mitochondrial respiratory chain and diminish electron 
leakage have also been demonstrated to decrease the gen -
eration of ROS. Moreover, lifestyle modifications, for in -
stance, regular physical activity, a diet that is balanced 
and rich in fruits and vegetables, and stress management, 
can also help in reducing oxidative stress.
4 Skin and coat changes
As our furry companion progresses through their geriatric 
years, it is common for them to experience alterations in 
their skin and coat. These modifications, brought about by 
a convergence of factors, including hormonal imbalances, 
compromised nutrient absorption, and a reduction in cel -
lular efficacy, necessitate a comprehensive understanding in 
order to properly attend to the needs of our aging pets and 
forestall the emergence of age-related dermatological af -
flictions. Hormonal imbalances, particularly those relating 
to thyroid dysfunction, represent a principal cause of skin 
and coat modifications in geriatric dogs and cats. Thyroid 
hormones are integral in regulating metabolic processes and 
skin health, and an imbalance in thyroid hormone levels can 
result in dermatological changes such as hair loss, thinning 
of the coat, and a loss of luster.
Another significant contributor to skin and coat changes 
in geriatric pets is a diminished capacity for nutrient ab -
sorption, particularly with regard to essential fatty acids like 
linoleic acid and arachidonic acid, which play a crucial role 
in maintaining the skin barrier and promoting healthy skin 
and coat growth. Furthermore, a deficiency in vitamins such 
as vitamin A and vitamin B12 can also contribute to skin and 
coat changes. In addition to the aforementioned factors, the 
aging process also leads to a decline in cellular functionality, 
including a reduction in skin elasticity and flexibility, and 
the manifestation of hyperkeratosis. These changes result 
in a thinning of the epidermal and dermal layers, shrinkage 
of hair follicles, and hair loss. Modifications in melanocyte 
production and tyrosinase activity within hair follicles also 
contribute to the production of white hairs, commonly ob -
served around the face and muzzle of geriatric dogs.
Furthermore, variations in sebum production may lead to 
the skin becoming scaly and the fur coat becoming dry and 
lackluster. A retrospective study has indicated that older dogs 
are more susceptible to developing cutaneous neoplasia, with 
the highest frequency of diagnoses occurring between the 
ages of 10 and 15. The most prevalent types of skin tumors in 
these cases include lipomas, adenomas, and mast cell tumors.
4.1 Understanding and managing skin problems 
in geriatric dogs and cats
As the age of our beloved companion animals progresses, 
the likelihood of them developing various skin diseases 
 increases, which can have a significant impact on their over-
all well-being and quality of life. The realm of skin prob -
lems afflicting geriatric pets encompasses a broad spectrum, 
ranging from seemingly benign dry skin to more ominous 
conditions such as neoplastic growths. In recent years, there 
have been marked advancements in the diagnostic and ther-
apeutic modalities available for the management of geriatric 
dermatological conditions. One such advancement, as noted 
by Davis et  al. (2018), is the utilization of dermatoscopy 
in the diagnosis of skin cancer in geriatric pets. This tool, 
which magnifies the skin and allows for a more detailed ex-
amination of cutaneous lesions, was found to significantly 
improve the accuracy of skin cancer diagnoses in a cohort 
of geriatric animals. The authors of this study therefore rec-
ommend that dermatoscopy be incorporated into the diag -
nostic armamentarium for skin cancer in geriatric pets.
5 Changes in body weight 
and condition
As the aging process unfolds in canines, a decrease in their 
basal metabolic rate becomes apparent, a consequence of 
the proportional modifications that ensue in their body com-
position. Such changes encompass a reduction in lean tissue 
and water, and a concomitant increase in the fat content. 
The study by Jang et al. (2018) sheds light on this phenom-
enon by evaluating the difference in body fat percentage 
between young adult dogs and their geriatric counterparts. 
The results revealed that while the former displayed a body 
fat percentage ranging between 15% and 20%, the latter ex-
hibited a body fat percentage that oscillated between 25% 
and 30%. While a trend of reduced physical activity among 
the majority of senior dogs is commonly observed, it is not 
an absolute trend. It is estimated that a canine’s total daily 
energy requirements may decline by as much as 30%–40% 
in the final third of their life due to the combined impact of 
decreased activity and metabolic rate, thereby exposing a 
subset of aging dogs to the elevated risk of obesity.
On the other hand, a greater proportion of dogs aged over 
12 years are underweight in comparison to other age groups, 
which can be linked to the age-related phenomenon of sar -
copenia in older dogs. Not all dogs, however, exhibit a re -
duction in physical activity as they progress into their senior 
years. Canines that preserve their level of physical activity 
may counteract the losses of lean body tissue that are associ-
ated with aging, thereby preventing substantial decreases in 
their basal metabolic rate. This highlights the crucial role that 
continued physical activity plays in aging dogs, especially in 
the maintenance of optimal body weight and overall health.
6 Musculoskeletal changes
The musculoskeletal system of geriatric canines and fe -
lines undergoes significant alterations because of the aging

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  343
 process. These changes can have a significant impact on the 
animal’s physical function, comfort, and quality of life.
6.1 Sarcopenia
The ubiquitous phenomenon of sarcopenia, characterized 
by the degenerative decline of musculature in a concomi -
tant decline of overall function and capacity, is a hallmark 
of the aging process in both domesticated felines and ca -
nines. The underlying etiology of sarcopenia is inherently 
multifactorial and intricate, influenced by various contrib -
uting factors such as physiological changes in hormone 
levels, fluctuations in nutritional status, and physical inac -
tivity. Studies have illustrated that sarcopenia in geriatric 
felines and canines is accompanied by a reduction in muscle 
strength, power, and endurance, leading to decreased mo -
bility, an increased propensity for falls and fractures, and 
impaired ability to perform basic activities of daily living. 
Furthermore, this decline in muscle mass and function is 
also correlated with decreased metabolic rate, exacerbat -
ing the risk of weight loss and increased vulnerability to 
infections.
Despite the significant impact of sarcopenia, the un -
derlying mechanisms responsible for the progressive de -
cline of musculature remain only partially understood. 
Nevertheless, current research suggests that sarcopenia is 
a result of a shift in the delicate balance between muscle 
protein synthesis and degradation, a reduction in the acti -
vation and proliferation of satellite cells, and alterations in 
crucial anabolic signaling pathways. Furthermore, a decline 
in hormones such as testosterone and insulin-like growth 
factor 1 (IGF-1) has also been implicated in the pathogen -
esis of sarcopenia in geriatric felines and canines. Given the 
detrimental effects of sarcopenia, the scientific community 
has focused considerable attention on developing clinical 
interventions to mitigate its progression in geriatric felines 
and canines. To this end, various strategies have been ex -
plored, including regular exercise and physical activity, 
dietary supplementation with essential amino acids, par -
ticularly leucine, and the administration of hormones such 
as testosterone and IGF-1. Research has demonstrated that 
these interventions are capable of maintaining muscle mass 
and function, as well as improving mobility, balance, and 
coordination in aging animals.
6.2 Osteoarthritis
The degenerative joint disease known as osteoarthritis is a 
widespread affliction that affects a considerable proportion 
of aging canines and felines. This pathological condition is 
the result of the cumulative and progressive wear and tear 
on the joints, resulting in the destruction of the cartilage, 
inflammation, pain, and a diminished capacity for mobility. 
Despite the vast body of research on the topic, the precise 
pathophysiology of osteoarthritis remains enigmatic and is 
believed to result from a confluence of biomechanical, bio-
chemical, and biological factors (Fig. 3).
Biomechanical factors, such as obesity, excessive joint 
loading, and atypical gait patterns, increase the likelihood 
of developing osteoarthritis by increasing mechanical stress 
on the joints, which exacerbates the destruction of the car -
tilage. Biochemical factors, including the presence of pro-
inflammatory cytokines and matrix metalloproteinases, 
have also been implicated in the etiology of osteoarthritis, 
contributing to the degradation of the cartilage matrix and 
subsequent destruction of the cartilage.
Biological factors, such as genetics and age, are also im-
portant considerations in the development of osteoarthritis. 
Certain breeds of dogs, for example, are predisposed to os-
teoarthritis due to their anatomy and size, and age-related 
alterations in the musculoskeletal system can raise the risk 
of developing this condition.
Diagnosis of osteoarthritis in aging canines and felines 
typically involves a comprehensive evaluation incorporating 
clinical signs, radiographic findings, and response to thera-
peutic interventions. Radiographic evidence of joint space 
reduction, subchondral bone sclerosis, and osteophyte for -
mation is considered a diagnostic hallmark of osteoarthritis.
The treatment of osteoarthritis in aging canines and fe -
lines necessitates a multimodal approach that addresses the 
pain and inflammation associated with the disease while 
concurrently addressing the underlying biomechanical and 
biochemical factors that contribute to its progression. This 
may involve weight management, physical therapy and 
Age related systemic changes 
Increase systemic 
inflammation
MIP1b, CRP, sTNFRI, TNF /g68, 
IL6, IL8, IL-18
Increase fat tissue 
inflammation
IL6, leptin, adiponectin, 
TNF /g68
Osteoarthritis
Joint tissue destruction, 
pain and disability 
Age related local changes
Age associated secretory 
phenotype
OSM, GM-CSF, MMP-1,-2,-3,
MCP-1, IL-1/g69, IL-6, IL-7 
Increase inflammatory 
mediators in joint tissue
IL-7, CCL5, IL-1/g69 CXCL-13, 
CCL8
FIG. 3 Age-related changes associated with osteoarthritis.

344  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 rehabilitation, the utilization of nonsteroidal antiinflamma -
tory drugs and other pain management medications, and the 
administration of nutraceuticals and supplements that pro -
mote joint health.
6.3 Osteophytosis
The phenomenon of osteophytosis, commonly referred to as 
the formation of exostoses in the skeletal system, is a ubiq-
uitous ailment observed in the geriatric population of both 
canines and felines and has been the object of extensive in-
vestigation within the veterinary medical community. The 
condition arises as a result of the gradual accretion of bony 
protuberances in articulations and is correlated with the de-
generative joint pathologies such as osteoarthritis. Studies 
have revealed that the inception of osteophytosis is due to the 
prolonged application of mechanical stress and pressure on 
the joints, leading to the manifestation of osseous outgrowths 
as a compensatory mechanism to the depreciation of articular 
cartilage. This progression is facilitated by the hyperproduc-
tion of osteoblasts, which are the cellular entities responsible 
for the formation of bone tissue. Thus, the appearance of 
osteophytes results in a further reduction in the joint cavity 
and a heightened mechanical stress, thereby exacerbating the 
degenerative changes in the articulation and inciting chronic 
pain and inflammation. It has been shown that the incidence 
of osteophytosis is particularly prevalent in the larger breeds 
of canines and felines with a history of joint trauma or physi-
cal inactivity. The build-up of exostoses in the joints results 
in a decline in joint function and mobility, causing substantial 
discomfort and agony in the affected animal.
The diagnosis of osteophytosis in geriatric domestic ani-
mals usually entails a combination of physical examination, ra-
diographic imaging, and clinical manifestations. Radiographic 
imaging can prove useful in detecting the existence of exos-
toses and evaluating the magnitude of joint degeneration. 
Physical examination may reveal joint discomfort, rigidity, and 
a diminished range of motion in the affected articulations.
7 Metabolic dysregulations: The 
interplay of aging and chronic diseases
Metabolic dysregulation is a growing concern among ge -
riatric dogs and cats, as it is associated with the develop -
ment of a range of age-related diseases, including diabetes, 
obesity, and fatty liver disease ( Colfax et  al., 2018 ). The 
interplay of aging and chronic diseases is thought to play a 
key role in the development of metabolic dysregulation in 
these animals (Hayes et al., 2019).
7.1 Diabetes mellitus
The manifestation of diabetes mellitus in geriatric felines 
and canines is a multifaceted and intricate pathological 
process that requires a comprehensive understanding of the 
underlying mechanisms to facilitate the implementation of 
efficacious treatment regimens and disease management 
strategies ( Münster et  al., 2020 ). At the forefront of the 
pathogenesis of diabetes in geriatric animals is a reduction 
in insulin secretion, which is a crucial hormone produced 
by the pancreas that is responsible for regulating glucose 
metabolism ( Strombeck, 2020 ). This reduction can arise 
from the pancreas failing to secrete enough insulin, or the 
onset of insulin resistance, which is characterized by cells 
becoming less responsive to insulin-mediated glucose regu-
lation (Nelson and Reusch, 2014 ). This leads to a state of 
hyperglycemia, characterized by an elevation in blood sugar 
levels.
Insulin resistance is a common condition seen in aging 
animals and is often the result of chronic inflammation, oxi-
dative stress, and hormonal imbalances ( de Laforcade and 
Freeman, 2019) (Fig. 4). Furthermore, there may also be a 
decline in beta cell function, which refers to the cells within 
the pancreas that are responsible for insulin production. With 
age, these cells may become damaged or deteriorate, thereby 
reducing insulin secretion and exacerbating hyperglycemia 
(Pöppl et al., 2020 ). In addition, the regulation of glucose 
metabolism in the liver may also be altered, contributing to 
the development of diabetes in geriatric animals. The liver is 
the central organ responsible for regulating the concentration 
of glucose in the bloodstream, and alterations in liver func-
tion may result in an increase in blood sugar levels (Roberts 
et al., 2015). These complex mechanisms highlight the im-
portance of a thorough understanding of the pathogenesis of 
diabetes in geriatric animals to facilitate the development of 
effective treatment and management strategies.
7.2 Obesity
The problem of obesity in geriatric canines and felines is 
a multifaceted phenomenon that arises from a confluence 
of intricate and interrelated factors, including both intrin -
sic and extrinsic elements. The intricate interplay of genetic 
predisposition, metabolic alterations, dietary imbalances, 
physical inactivity, hormonal fluctuations, and decreased 
muscle mass constitutes the underlying basis for this per -
vasive issue. With regard to metabolic changes, the slowing 
down of the metabolic processes in aging dogs and cats’ re-
sults in a decline in their energy requirements and a dimin -
ished capacity to metabolize surplus calories, thus leading 
to a progressive accumulation of fat stores and the eventual 
manifestation of obesity.
Genetic predisposition, a critical intrinsic factor, plays 
a crucial role in the etiology of obesity in geriatric dogs 
and cats, with certain breeds, such as Labrador Retrievers, 
Beagles, and Scottish Terriers, exhibiting a higher pro -
pensity toward obesity when compared to other breeds. 
Dietary imbalances, characterized by high caloric, fat and

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  345
sugar content, also contribute significantly to the develop -
ment of obesity in aging pets. The indiscriminate consump-
tion of table scraps, excessive treats, and unlimited access 
to food can exacerbate the problem, leading to excessive 
weight gain. Physical inactivity, due to underlying medical 
conditions such as joint pain, arthritis, and the like, can 
also play a critical role in the development of obesity in 
geriatric dogs and cats. Hormonal imbalances, including 
fluctuations in thyroid hormone levels, can also contribute 
to the development of obesity by altering the metabolism, 
resulting in weight gain. The decline in muscle mass and 
physical activity in aging pets also contributes significantly 
to the problem, with decreased energy expenditure and an 
inability to metabolize excess calories further exacerbating 
the issue and leading to the development of obesity.
7.3 Fatty liver disease
Hepatic lipidosis, otherwise referred to as fatty liver disease, 
is a prevalent pathological condition afflicting geriatric fe -
lines and canines, characterized by a pathological accumu -
lation of adipose tissue within the parenchymal cells of the 
liver (Center et al., 2021). Despite being a widely observed 
phenomenon, the underlying etiology remains poorly com-
prehended and continues to evade a comprehensive under -
standing. However, contemporary studies posit that this 
phenomenon is an outcome of the synergistic interplay be -
tween multiple pathogenic factors, including alterations in 
metabolic processes, insulin insensitivity, and diminished 
hepatic functional capacity (Deng et al., 2020).
The metabolic modifications, commonly observed in 
the elderly canines and felines, are thought to be a critical 
factor in the pathogenesis of fatty liver disease ( German, 
2020). With advancing age, the basal metabolic rate tends 
to diminish, resulting in reduced efficiency in the pro -
cessing and storage of lipids. This leads to the deposition 
of excessive amounts of adipose tissue within the liver, 
thereby leading to progressive hepatocellular damage and 
functional impairments. Insulin resistance, another crucial 
contributor to hepatic lipidosis, is a condition in which the 
body’s cells become refractory to insulin-mediated glucose 
uptake. This results in elevated circulating glucose levels 
and increased conversion of glucose into lipids, leading to 
the build-up of lipid droplets within the liver parenchyma 
(Clemmons, 2021).
Moreover, hepatic functional capacity is also implicated 
in the development of fatty liver disease. The liver is a mul-
tifunctional organ that plays a crucial role in the elimination 
of toxic substances and the storage of essential nutrients. In 
elderly canines and felines, the liver may exhibit a decline 
in functional capacity, resulting in the accumulation of adi-
pose tissue and other waste products, ultimately leading to 
liver damage and increased susceptibility to hepatic lipido-
sis (Byrne et al., 2022).
8 Oral and gingival diseases
The manifestation of oral and periodontal pathologies 
in the geriatric canine and feline populations is a ubiq -
uitous occurrence brought about by the accretion of 
OXIDATIVE 
STRESS
Endothelial cell injury
Serine 
phosphorylation of 
IRS
Tyrosine 
phosphorylation of 
IRS
GLUT 4
Decrease eNOS
Decrease NO
Decrease blood 
flow
Decrease cellular 
glucose uptake
Increase Retinol 
binding protein 4
Insulin resistance Increase hepatic 
glucose output
FIG. 4 Oxidative stress and insulin resistance.

346  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 supragingival and subgingival calculus. This pathological 
state arises from the interaction of a multitude of factors, 
including the build-up of oral microorganisms, modifica -
tions in oral anatomy and function, and systemic health 
perturbations. A prevalent oral alteration observed in aged 
domestic animals is tooth loss, which may be a conse -
quence of numerous causes, including trauma, periodonti -
tis, and dental caries. This tooth loss may result in gingival 
recession, exposing the roots of the residual dentition and 
rendering them more vulnerable to pathological processes 
such as injury and disease. In certain instances, tooth loss 
may also induce modifications to the mandibular form and 
function, thus affecting the animal’s ability to masticate 
and ingest food.
One of the primary etiological factors behind oral 
and gingival pathologies is the accumulation of oral 
bacteria. These oral microorganisms ferment sugars and 
other carbohydrates, producing a pellicle that adheres 
to the dentition and gums, and create an environment 
conducive to the growth and multiplication of oral bac -
teria, resulting in gingival inflammation and infection. 
Another factor contributing to oral and gingival patholo -
gies in geriatric canines and felines is the modifications 
in oral anatomy and function that occur with advanc -
ing age. With the progression of time, the oral cavity 
may undergo structural changes that make it more chal -
lenging to maintain optimal oral hygiene, leading to an 
increased risk for oral and gingival pathologies. For in -
stance, the teeth may become more brittle and prone to 
decay, while the gums may become more susceptible to 
disease and less resilient.
Systemic health issues such as diabetes and nephropathy 
may also play a role in the development of oral and gingival 
pathologies in geriatric domestic animals. These systemic 
health perturbations can alter oral anatomy and function, as 
well as compromise the animal’s immune system, thereby 
increasing the susceptibility to oral and gingival patholo -
gies. Moreover, geriatric canines and felines may also be 
susceptible to the development of oral tumors and infec -
tions, which may range from benign neoplasms such as 
papilloma’s to malignant neoplasms such as oral squamous 
cell carcinomas. These tumors and infections can cause 
oral discomfort, swelling, and difficulties in ingesting food, 
necessitating therapeutic interventions such as surgery or 
pharmacotherapy. It is therefore imperative to seek veteri -
nary attention in a timely manner to address these oral and 
gingival alterations in geriatric domestic animals. This may 
include routine dental prophylaxis, scaling, and polishing 
to eliminate calculus, as well as diagnostic tests such as 
radiography to identify and monitor underlying pathologi -
cal processes. In certain circumstances, medications and 
other forms of therapy may also be indicated to manage 
oral discomfort and reduce the severity of oral and gingival 
pathologies.
9 The role of the gut microbiome
The intricacies of the gut microbiome and its association 
with the health and overall welfare of both humans and ani-
mals has been a topic of significant interest in recent years, 
particularly within the field of geriatric medicine. This is 
due to mounting evidence suggesting a close relationship 
between the gut microbiome and various age-related dis -
eases (Rinninella et al., 2019). In dogs and cats, the gut mi-
crobiome has been observed to undergo alterations because 
of aging, which in turn has been implicated in the increased 
production of pro-inflammatory cytokines. These cytokines 
have been shown to play a significant role in the pathogen-
esis of a variety of geriatric diseases, such as arthritis in 
dogs (Suchodolski et al., 2019).
In addition to its impact on pro-inflammatory cytokine 
production, the gut microbiome has also been implicated in 
the development of several other geriatric diseases in these 
species. For instance, shifts in the gut microbiome have 
been associated with the emergence of liver disease in cats, 
as a result of the production of toxic metabolites that can 
cause harm to this organ ( Tress et al., 2021). Similarly, the 
gut microbiome has been shown to be a contributing factor 
in the development of kidney disease in dogs, as a result 
of its ability to produce uremic toxins ( Chen et al., 2019 ). 
Furthermore, there is evidence suggesting that the gut mi -
crobiome may also play a role in the development of cancer 
in dogs and cats, such as the increased production of carci -
nogenic metabolites in cats (Reddy et al., 2017).
10 Respiratory tract changes
The respiratory system, a central aspect within the physi -
ologies of geriatric felines and canines, is imperative in 
facilitating the vital process of gas exchange between the 
atmosphere and the circulatory medium. The lungs, the 
primary locus for this gaseous transfer, are tasked with 
absorbing oxygen and expelling carbon dioxide. With the 
progression of age, however, several deleterious alterations 
occur within the respiratory tract of geriatric dogs and cats, 
impairing their overall health and well-being. One of the 
most pronounced modifications that occur within the re -
spiratory system of geriatric animals is a decrease in lung 
elasticity, leading to a reduction in the lung’s capability to 
expand and contract with optimal efficacy. This reduction 
in lung compliance results in a diminished ability to inhale 
adequate volumes of air with each breath, leading to a drop 
in oxygen levels in the bloodstream, potentially inducing 
respiratory distress, fatigue, and lethargy.
Moreover, there is an increase in airway resistance within 
the respiratory tract of geriatric animals, characterized by a 
constriction of the airways, making it challenging for air to 
flow through them. This increment in airway impedance can 
result in dyspnea, particularly during physical exertion.

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  347
In conjunction with the decline in lung elasticity and 
increase in airway resistance, geriatric dogs and cats also 
exhibit a reduction in the number of functional alveoli, 
the microscopic sacs within the lungs where gas exchange 
takes place. The decrease in the alveolar count reduces the 
surface area available for gas exchange, causing a fall in 
oxygen levels in the bloodstream. Another crucial change 
that occurs within the respiratory tract of geriatric animals 
is a decline in the lung’s ability to clear mucus. Mucus, pro-
duced in the lungs to prevent the inhalation of particulate 
matter, experiences a reduction in its clearance, leading to 
its accumulation within the airways, resulting in airway ob-
struction and difficulty in breathing, along with wheezing 
and coughing.
Geriatric dogs and cats experience a decline in the 
efficiency of cilia, the minute hair-like structures within 
the airways responsible for the movement of mucus out 
of the lungs. The reduction in cilia efficiency leads to an 
accumulation of mucus in the airways and an increased 
likelihood of respiratory infections. There is an elevation 
in the production of histamine in response to allergens and 
irritants in geriatric animals, leading to an exacerbation of 
airway narrowing and difficulty in breathing, along with 
coughing, wheezing, and in severe cases, anaphylaxis. 
Finally, geriatric dogs and cats are also more vulnerable to 
respiratory infections, such as pneumonia, resulting from 
a decline in their immune function. Pneumonia, a critical 
ailment that causes inflammation and fluid accumulation 
in the lungs, results in dyspnea, coughing, and chest pain.
To mitigate the detrimental effects of respiratory tract 
changes in geriatric dogs and cats, pet owners should be 
vigilant in monitoring their pet’s breathing patterns and 
promptly seek veterinary care in the event of any observ -
able signs of labored breathing, coughing, or wheezing. 
Additionally, maintaining a healthy weight and reducing 
exposure to environmental pollutants can also significantly 
lower the likelihood of respiratory complications in geriat -
ric pets.
11 Understanding the pathobiology of 
cardiac senescence: Heart diseases
As the age of dogs and cats increases, the function of their 
heart changes just like in humans. Aging can cause a de -
cline in the heart’s ability to pump blood effectively and 
increase the risk of heart diseases ( Fig.  5). Some of the 
most common heart conditions that affect older dogs and 
cats include:
Age related changesi n 
cardiovascular system
Endothelial
dysfunctiona nd
increased arterial
stiffening andw all
thickening
Increaseda fterload
Left ventricular 
hypertrophy
Prolonged cardiac 
action potential
Impaired myocardial 
relaxa
Reduced in early
diastolicf illing rate
Reduced maximal
heart rate
Reducedc ardiac
reserve
Decreased aerobic 
capacity
FIG. 5 Age-related changes in cardiovascular system.

348  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
11.1 Dilated cardiomyopathy
Dilated cardiomyopathy is a prevalent cardiac affliction in ge-
riatric felines and canines characterized by an enlarged heart 
and decreased cardiac function. Its exact etiology remains un-
certain, but it is believed to result from an interplay between 
genetic, environmental, and nutritional factors (Kittleson and 
Kienle, 2020). Genetic predisposition is one of the primary 
drivers behind DCM, particularly evident in certain breeds of 
cats and dogs that are predisposed to this condition due to in-
herited genetic mutations (Meurs et al., 2020). Environmental 
exposure, such as exposure to toxins or infections, can also 
play a significant role in the development of DCM.
Chemical exposure or the administration of certain 
drugs can cause severe damage to the heart, leading to the 
development of DCM (Decloedt et al., 2021). Similarly, vi-
ral, or bacterial infections can also weaken the heart and 
increase the risk of DCM ( Linney et al., 2020 ). Nutrition 
also plays a vital role in the development of DCM. A diet 
deficient in essential nutrients, particularly taurine, can lead 
to heart damage and increase the risk of DCM (Hodge et al., 
2021). Furthermore, overweight or obese animals are also 
at a higher risk of developing DCM due to the increased 
strain placed on their hearts, leading to cardiac dysfunction 
(Freeman et al., 2020).
11.2 Valvular heart disease (VHD)
The manifestation of valvular heart disease in geriatric 
dogs and cats is a common phenomenon, characterized by 
impairment or alterations in the functional integrity of the 
heart valves. This condition often presents with symptoms 
such as murmurs, dyspnea, and cardiac insufficiency. One 
of the paramount etiologic factors responsible for the in -
cidence of VHD in geriatric canines and felines is aging. 
With the progression of time, the cardiac valves tend to un-
dergo rigidity and decrease elasticity, leading to difficulties 
in proper valve function. This can result in regurgitation of 
blood into the heart, leading to the aforementioned symp -
toms. Furthermore, aging can also result in cardiac enlarge-
ment, exacerbating the strain on the heart valves.
Another contributing factor to VHD in geriatric dogs 
and cats is genetics. Certain breeds of canines and fe -
lines may be genetically predisposed to the development 
of VHD, such as the Cavalier King Charles Spaniel and 
German Shepherd in dogs, and their higher susceptibility 
is attributed to genetic predisposition. Underlying medical 
conditions can also increase the susceptibility of geriatric 
dogs and cats to VHD. For instance, animals suffering from 
hypertension or cardiac disease are at an increased risk for 
developing VHD due to the added stress on the heart and 
its valves. Additionally, animals with autoimmune diseases 
may also be at a higher risk for VHD due to the damage 
inflicted on the heart valves by these conditions.
11.3 Atrial fibrillation
Atrial fibrillation (AF), an arrhythmia commonly encoun -
tered in geriatric canines and felines, arises as a result of 
the aberrant electrical impulses in the heart, manifesting as 
irregular heartbeats. The manifestation of AF is character -
ized by the rapid and irregular beating of the atria, the up -
per chambers of the heart, leading to a rapid and irregular 
ventricular rate, resulting in decreased cardiac output and 
compromised circulation to the body, inducing symptoms 
such as fatigue, weakness, exercise intolerance, and in some 
cases, even the formation of life-threatening blood clots 
through embolization to other parts of the organism.
The etiology of AF in geriatric pets encompasses a com-
plex interplay of several key steps, including:
1. Aberrant electrical signaling : The normally synchro -
nized and coordinated electrical signaling within the 
heart becomes disorganized and chaotic in AF, poten -
tially due to age-related changes in cardiac anatomy and 
function, and/or underlying medical conditions.
2. Impaired electrical conduction: The disorganized elec -
trical signaling in AF culminates in fibrillation, a rapid 
and irregular heartbeat, as the electrical impulses are un-
able to propagate normally through the heart’s tissues.
3. Irregular contractions: The rapid and irregular electrical 
impulses in AF result in the atria contracting rapidly and 
irregularly, leading to a rapid and irregular ventricular 
rate, and decreased blood flow to the body.
4. Thrombus formation: In certain cases, AF can result in 
the formation of blood clots, due to the stasis of blood 
flow caused by the rapid and irregular contractions in AF.
Diagnosis of AF in geriatric pets may encompass a va -
riety of modalities, including electrocardiography (ECG), 
Holter monitoring, and echocardiography. Management 
strategies for AF in geriatric pets may include pharmaco -
logical agents to slow the heart rate, anticoagulants to pre -
vent thrombus formation, and electrical cardioversion to 
restore normal cardiac rhythm, and in select cases, surgical 
intervention to address underlying contributing factors.
11.4 Arrhythmias
Arrhythmias in geriatric canines and felines denote irregu -
larities in the cardiac rhythm, which can be occasioned by 
a multiplicity of factors, including but not limited to aging, 
heredity, preexisting pathologies, and the utilization of spe-
cific pharmacological agents.
1. Myocardial damage: As dogs and cats experience the 
ravages of time, their cardiac muscle may become en -
feebled, resulting in arrhythmias. The myocardium may 
be compromised due to genetic predispositions, persis -
tent pathological processes, or exposure to certain toxic 
substances.

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  349
2. Electrophysiological alterations : The electrical con -
ductivity of the heart may undergo transformations as 
dogs and cats age, leading to modifications in the nor -
mal electrical conduction system of the heart. This may 
trigger arrhythmias by altering the normal electrical im-
pulses that regulate the heart’s rhythm.
3. Atrial fibrillation: This is a widespread form of arrhyth-
mia in geriatric dogs and cats and transpires when the 
heart beats in an irregular manner due to abnormal elec-
trical signals in the atria. This may cause the heart to 
beat too rapidly, too slowly, or in an irregular pattern.
4. Ventricular arrhythmias: Ventricular arrhythmias refer 
to aberrant heartbeats that originate in the ventricles. 
These arrhythmias can be life-threatening and may trig-
ger sudden cardiac death.
5. Medication-induced arrhythmias : Geriatric dogs and 
cats may be administered a plethora of medications for 
various medical conditions. Some medications, such as 
nonsteroidal antiinflammatory drugs and selected anti -
arrhythmic medications, can cause arrhythmias by alter-
ing the electrical conductivity of the heart.
6. Preexisting pathologies: Chronic diseases, such as heart 
disease, kidney disease, and thyroid disease, can result 
in arrhythmias in geriatric dogs and cats. These diseases 
can modify the electrical conductivity of the heart and 
trigger arrhythmias.
11.5 Treatments for geriatric cardiovascular 
health
The management of cardiovascular disease in geriatric fe -
lines and canines requires a comprehensive approach, in -
corporating both pharmacological and nonpharmacological 
interventions. Pharmacologically, the use of angiotensin-
converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors, angiotensin receptor 
blockers (ARBs), and beta-blockers has been extensively 
researched and widely employed in the medical manage -
ment of cardiovascular disease in aging animals ( Gugjoo 
et  al., 2021 ). These medications operate by decreasing 
blood pressure, reducing the cardiac workload, and enhanc-
ing blood flow, thereby providing substantial therapeutic 
benefits to these patients. In cases of severe cardiovascular 
disease in geriatric felines and canines, surgical interven -
tions may be necessary to achieve effective management. 
A range of surgical procedures, such as valve replacement, 
balloon valvuloplasty, and cardiac catheterization, have 
been developed and applied to manage the various presen -
tations of cardiovascular disease in aging animals ( Mishra 
et al., 2020).
Finally, nutritional supplementation, particularly with 
omega-3 fatty acids, l-carnitine, and taurine, has been 
demonstrated to provide therapeutic benefits to geriatric fe-
lines and canines with cardiovascular disease (Kumar et al., 
2021). These supplements help to improve heart function, 
reduce inflammation, and promote overall cardiovascular 
health, providing a complementary approach to the man -
agement of this debilitating condition.
12 Aging-associated nephropathy: 
Exploring renal function dynamics and 
pathophysiology
Renal and urinary tract changes in geriatric dogs and cats 
are commonly observed and can lead to a range of physi -
ological changes and medical conditions. These changes are 
often the result of a complex interplay between age-related 
changes in renal structure and function, hormonal changes, 
and the accumulation of damage from long-term exposure 
to toxins and oxidative stress.
12.1 Renal structure and function
With aging, renal structure and function can decline, leading 
to a reduction in renal blood flow and a decline in glomeru-
lar filtration rate (GFR) (Cameron et al., 2020). This decline 
in GFR results in a reduction in the rate of elimination of 
waste products from the body and can lead to an accumu -
lation of waste products in the blood. The decline in renal 
blood flow can result in a reduction in renal perfusion and 
oxygenation, which can lead to ischemic injury to the renal 
tubules and interstitial cells (Aird, 2020). These changes can 
lead to a decline in renal function and the development of 
age-related renal disease. In addition to the decline in renal 
blood flow and GFR, aging can also result in a decline in 
renal tubular function, leading to a reduction in the ability of 
the renal tubules to reabsorb essential ions, such as sodium 
and potassium, and to secrete waste products, such as urea 
and creatinine (Choudhury et al., 2020). This decline in renal 
tubular function can lead to an impairment in electrolyte bal-
ance and acid–base homeostasis, which can further contrib-
ute to the decline in renal function and the development of 
age-related renal disease. Factors responsible for age-related 
renal dysfunction are depicted in Fig. 6.
Another aspect of aging that can impact renal function 
is the decline in renal blood vessels, which can cause an 
increase in resistance to blood flow and a decrease in renal 
blood flow. This decline in renal blood vessels can lead to 
an increase in oxidative stress and inflammation, which can 
cause damage to the renal tubules and interstitial cells, fur -
ther exacerbating the decline in renal function and increas -
ing the risk of age-related renal disease ( Hanssen et  al., 
2021). Furthermore, aging can result in an accumulation 
of advanced glycation end products (AGEs) in the renal 
tissue, which can cause oxidative stress and inflammation 
and result in an increased risk of age-related renal disease. 
AGEs are formed when glucose reacts with proteins and 
lipids in the body, and their accumulation can cause oxi -
dative stress and inflammation, leading to the development

350  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
of  age- related renal disease and other age-related diseases, 
such as cardiovascular disease and diabetes.
12.2 Hormonal changes
As the individual progresses through the aging process, a 
multitude of physiological alterations can ensue, one of 
which being a perturbation in the endocrine changes that 
can significantly impact renal function and urine out -
put. The decline in certain hormones such as insulin, for 
instance, can bring about a reduction in renal blood flow 
and glomerular filtration rate, thereby decreasing the effi -
ciency of the renal system in filtering waste products from 
the bloodstream. Moreover, the concomitant drop in hor -
mones that regulate fluid and electrolyte balance, such as 
aldosterone, can result in the onset of conditions like renal 
hypoperfusion and renal tubular acidosis, which are char -
acterized by diminished renal perfusion and a disturbance 
in the normal acid–base balance of the body, respectively.
12.3 Toxin and oxidative stress
Recent studies have shown that the prevalence of chronic 
kidney disease (CKD) in dogs and cats increases with 
age, with up to 50% of senior pets affected by the condi -
tion ( DiBartola et  al., 2012 ; Geddes, 2018 ). In addition, 
exposure to environmental toxins, such as lead, cadmium, 
and mercury, has been linked to a higher risk of CKD in 
both species ( Barsanti et  al., 2020 ; Lulich et  al., 2016 ). 
Furthermore, oxidative stress has been found to play a 
key role in the development and progression of CKD, as 
it triggers the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines 
and activates pathways that lead to fibrosis and tissue dam-
age. Pathophysiological changes due to aging are listed in 
Table 2.
In terms of urinary tract infections (UTIs), studies have 
shown that these are more common in older dogs and cats, 
especially in females, due to a decrease in estrogen levels 
and changes in the composition of the urinary microbiome. 
In addition, the risk of neoplasms in the urinary system in -
creases with age, with bladder cancer being the most com -
mon type of cancer in dogs ( Cortese et  al., 2019 ; Knapp 
et al., 2016). Early detection and treatment of these condi -
tions can greatly improve the prognosis and quality of life 
of affected pets.
Furthermore, as dogs and cats’ age increases, their im -
mune system also undergoes changes, making them more 
prone to urinary tract infections and neoplasms. The decline 
Age related
renal 
dysfunction
Oxidative
stress
Acutek idney 
injury
Increased
RAAS activity
Obesity, 
metabolic 
syndrome
Hypertension
Abnormal 
lipid
metabolism
Transforming 
growthf actor a
Advanced
glycatione nd
products
Decreased
nitric oxide
FIG. 6 Factors responsible for age-related renal dysfunction.

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  351
in the efficiency of the immune system, combined with the 
accumulation of toxins and oxidative stress, can lead to 
chronic renal diseases and urinary tract disorders. These 
conditions may present a wide range of symptoms, such as 
an increase in thirst, frequency of urination, lethargy, and a 
decrease in appetite and weight. These symptoms can be in-
dicative of the onset of renal and urinary tract dysfunction, 
and prompt medical attention should be sought to prevent 
the progression of the disease.
12.4 Urologic changes
At the cellular level, the formation of bladder stones in ag -
ing pets is the result of alterations in the intricate interplay 
between the components of urine and the bladder mucosal 
environment. These changes are facilitated by the crystal -
lization of mineral constituents present in the urine, which 
precipitate and gradually coalesce to form solid masses that 
have the potential to adorn the bladder wall. The bladder 
mucus, which serves as a protective barrier against the for -
mation of these stones, undergoes shifts in its composition 
and balance, leading to an increased likelihood of bladder 
stone formation.
Additionally, aging can also have profound impacts on 
the urinary sphincter, a critical component of the urinary 
system that regulates bladder emptying and maintains conti-
nence. The smooth muscle cells, responsible for the contrac-
tion and relaxation of the urinary sphincter, tend to undergo 
a reduction in size and quantity with age. Furthermore, 
changes in the nervous system and neurotransmitter release 
can also alter the function of the urinary sphincter, lead -
ing to a decreased ability to maintain continence and an in-
creased risk of urinary incontinence. Hormonal fluctuations 
and imbalances are also known to play a significant role in 
the development of urologic changes in geriatric pets. For 
instance, a decline in estrogen levels in dogs can result in a 
reduction of urethral tone and an increased risk of urinary 
incontinence. These hormonal imbalances are often linked 
to the aging process, highlighting the intricate interplay be-
tween aging and urologic health in geriatric pets.
In conclusion, the onset of urologic changes in aging 
pets is the result of complex interactions between various 
factors, including alterations in bladder and urethral anat -
omy and function, changes in urine composition and blad -
der mucus, fluctuations in hormonal balance, and changes 
in nervous system function. The cumulative impact of these 
factors leads to an increased risk of bladder stone formation 
and urinary incontinence in geriatric dogs and cats.
13 Changes to the endocrine system
The endocrine system is a complex network of glands and 
hormones that regulate various physiological processes 
in the body. As pets age, they experience a decline in the 
function of various endocrine glands, leading to changes in 
hormone production and release. These changes can result 
in a wide range of physiological and pathological effects, 
such as alterations in metabolism, immune function, and 
behavior. One of the most notable changes to the endocrine 
system in geriatric dogs and cats is the decline in thyroid 
hormone production. The thyroid gland, located in the neck, 
produces and releases hormones that regulate metabolic 
rate, body temperature, and heart rate. With age, the thyroid 
gland becomes less efficient in producing these hormones, 
leading to a condition known as hypothyroidism. Clinical 
signs of hypothyroidism in geriatric pets include weight 
gain, fatigue, and skin and hair changes.
Another endocrine gland that undergoes changes in ge -
riatric pets is the pancreas. The pancreas is responsible for 
producing and secreting insulin, a hormone that regulates 
blood sugar levels. As pets age, the pancreas becomes less 
responsive to changes in blood glucose levels, leading to in-
sulin resistance and an increased risk for diabetes mellitus. 
Clinical signs of diabetes in geriatric pets include increased 
thirst and urination, weight loss, and poor coat condition. 
In addition to changes in thyroid and pancreas function, 
geriatric dogs and cats also experience alterations in adre -
nal gland function. The adrenal glands produce a variety 
of hormones, including cortisol, which is involved in the 
regulation of stress and glucose metabolism. As pets age, 
the adrenal glands can become overactive, leading to an in-
crease in cortisol production and a condition known as hy -
peradrenocorticism. Clinical signs of  hyperadrenocorticism 
TABLE. 2 Age-related pathophysiological changes  
in renal system.
S. No. Renal system
Pathophysiological 
changes
1. Renal blood flow Relative increase of 
medullary blood flow
Renal blood flow 
decreased
2. Glomerulus Decreased glomerular 
filtration rate
Increased permeability 
to macromolecules and 
filtration fraction
3. Tubule Impaired acidification
Deranged tubular transport
Impaired concentration 
and dilution
Impaired ability for sodium 
handling
4. Other Decreased renin synthesis 
and 10-α hydroxylase 
activity

352  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
in geriatric pets include increased thirst and urination, ex -
cessive panting, and muscle wasting. Finally, changes to the 
reproductive system can also occur in geriatric pets. Male 
dogs and cats can experience a decline in testosterone pro -
duction, leading to a decrease in libido and muscle mass. 
Female dogs and cats can experience changes in estrous 
cycles, leading to an increased risk for ovarian or mammary 
gland tumors.
14 Age-related hearing and vision loss
As companion animals progress through the later stages of 
their lives, a decline in the functioning of their sensory mo-
dalities can become increasingly pronounced. This decline, 
which encompasses a wide range of auditory and visual 
impairments, can have a profound impact on the animal’s 
quality of life and their ability to effectively negotiate their 
environment.
The onset of age-related hearing loss in dogs is often 
observed in the middle stages of life, around 7–12  years of 
age, and can progress in a gradual manner over time ( Fay, 
2010). This phenomenon is similarly observed in cats, 
with reports indicating that hearing loss can commence 
at around 8–12  years of age ( Martin and Nielson, 2014 ). 
Similarly, age-related vision loss in dogs is also typically 
first observed in middle age, around 7–12 years of age, and 
can worsen in a gradual manner over time ( Bonagura and 
Fox, 2013). This issue is also prevalent in aging cats, with 
reports indicating that vision loss can commence at around 
8–12 years of age (Lai et al., 2015).
14.1 Pathophysiology of geriatric audio-visual 
impairment
Geriatric audio-visual impairment in dogs and cats refers 
to age-related changes in the auditory and visual systems 
that lead to decreased function. Pathophysiology of this 
condition is complex and multifactorial, and it can result 
from changes in the anatomy and physiology of the ears 
and eyes, as well as from changes in the central nervous 
system that process auditory and visual signals. In the au -
ditory system, age-related changes include changes in the 
inner ear, including the cochlea, the organ of Corti, and the 
auditory nerve. These changes can lead to decreased sensi -
tivity to sound, particularly in high-frequency sounds, and 
decreased ability to process sound information. In addition, 
changes in the middle ear, such as the development of otitis 
media, can lead to decreased sound transmission and further 
impair hearing.
In the visual system, age-related changes include 
changes in the anatomy and function of the eye, including 
the lens, the retina, and the optic nerve. The lens becomes 
less flexible and less transparent with age, leading to de -
creased visual acuity and increased light scatter. Changes 
in the retina, such as the formation of drusen and pigment 
changes, can lead to decreased sensitivity to light and 
decreased visual acuity. In addition, changes in the optic 
nerve, such as atrophy, can lead to decreased transmis -
sion of visual signals to the brain. Central nervous system 
changes also play a role in geriatric audio-visual impair -
ment. Changes in the brainstem and midbrain, such as de -
generation of the auditory and visual pathways, can lead 
to decreased processing of auditory and visual signals. 
Decreased blood flow and changes in neurotransmitter 
levels in the central nervous system can also contribute to 
decreased auditory and visual processing.
14.2 Diagnostic approaches for geriatric audio-
visual impairment
The diagnosis of geriatric audio-visual impairment requires 
a comprehensive evaluation of the pet’s sensory function. 
This may include a thorough history, physical examination, 
and laboratory tests, such as auditory brainstem response 
(ABR) testing for hearing loss and ophthalmological exams 
for visual impairments. Additionally, imaging studies, such 
as computed tomography (CT) scans or magnetic resonance 
imaging (MRI), may be used to evaluate the underlying 
structures of the auditory and visual systems and identify 
any degenerative changes.
14.3 Treatment and management of geriatric 
audio-visual impairment
Treatment and management of geriatric audio-visual im -
pairment in dogs and cats involve a multifaceted approach 
that considers both the underlying causes and the symptoms 
of the condition. The following are some of the most com -
mon strategies used to manage geriatric audio-visual im -
pairment in these companion animals.
1. Medical management : In some cases, geriatric audio-
visual impairment may be caused by underlying medi -
cal conditions, such as ear infections, cataracts, and 
glaucoma. Treatment of these underlying conditions can 
help to alleviate symptoms of audio-visual impairment. 
For example, surgical removal of cataracts in dogs and 
cats can significantly improve their vision, while antibi-
otics can be used to treat ear infections.
2. Supportive measures : To manage the symptoms of 
 audio-visual impairment, supportive measures can be 
implemented to make the animal’s environment safer and 
more comfortable. For example, providing bright light -
ing, reducing clutter, and placing rugs or nonslip mats in 
areas where the animal walks can help to improve their 
vision and reduce the risk of falls. Additionally, provid-
ing a familiar and consistent routine can also help to im-
prove their overall quality of life.

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  353
3. Assistive devices : Assistive devices such as hearing 
aids and magnifying glasses can be used to help dogs 
and cats with audio-visual impairment. Hearing aids 
for dogs and cats work by amplifying sounds, making 
it easier for the animal to hear. Magnifying glasses can 
also be used to help improve vision in animals with cata-
racts or other visual impairments.
4. Training and enrichment: Training and enrichment ac -
tivities can be beneficial for dogs and cats with audio-
visual impairment, as they can help to keep their minds 
active and engaged. For example, training exercises that 
rely on touch and smell, such as hide-and-seek games or 
scent work, can help to keep the animal stimulated and 
engaged despite their visual or auditory limitations.
14.4 Prevention of geriatric audio-visual 
impairment
The prevention of geriatric audio-visual impairment in dogs 
and cats represents a critical aspect of ensuring the long-
term health and well-being of these cherished companion 
animals. Achieving this goal requires a comprehensive 
and multipronged approach that considers various factors, 
including early detection, lifestyle modifications, preven -
tative measures, and genetic screening. Early detection is 
of utmost importance in preventing geriatric audio-visual 
impairment. Regular veterinary check-ups and screenings, 
such as hearing and vision tests, are crucial in the early de -
tection of changes in sensory function. This allows for early 
interventions, such as the administration of corrective thera-
pies or lifestyle modifications, to be implemented, which 
can help to slow or prevent the progression of the condi -
tion. In addition to early detection, lifestyle modifications 
also play a crucial role in preventing geriatric audio-visual 
impairment in dogs and cats. A well-balanced diet that pro-
vides essential vitamins and minerals, such as vitamin A, 
which is critical for vision, can help to maintain sensory 
function and prevent age-related decline. Additionally, lim-
iting exposure to environmental toxins, such as heavy met-
als and pesticides, can also help to prevent the accumulation 
of these substances in the body, which can contribute to sen-
sory decline.
Preventative measures, such as regular exercise and 
exposure to varied stimuli, can also play a crucial role in 
maintaining sensory function and preventing age-related 
decline. Activities that stimulate hearing and vision, such as 
playing fetch, hunting games, and exploring new environ -
ments, can help to maintain and improve sensory function 
in dogs and cats. In some cases, geriatric audio-visual im -
pairment may have a genetic component. In these instances, 
genetic screening can be used to identify animals that are at 
higher risk for developing audio-visual impairment, allow -
ing for early intervention and preventative measures to be 
implemented.
15 Fueling the aging process: The 
latest research on nutrition and geriatric 
disease prevention
15.1 Innovative orthopedic therapeutic 
approaches for geriatric arthritis management
Arthritis is a common condition in companion animals, 
especially as they age. Geriatric pets are prone to the de -
velopment of degenerative joint diseases, leading to pain, 
lameness, and decreased mobility. Effective management 
of arthritis in geriatric pets requires a multidisciplinary ap -
proach that includes pharmaceutical, physical therapy, and 
orthopedic interventions.
15.1.1 Stem cell therapy
Stem cell therapy has emerged as a novel and promis -
ing modality for the management of arthritis in geriatric 
canines and felines. Arthritis is a prevalent pathological 
condition characterized by inflammation and degeneration 
of joints, leading to significant discomfort, reduced joint 
mobility, and decreased quality of life in geriatric ani -
mals. In this regard, stem cell therapy has demonstrated 
remarkable efficacy in reducing inflammation, promoting 
tissue regeneration, and improving joint function in these 
patients.
The underlying mechanism of stem cell therapy in the 
treatment of arthritis involves the introduction of mesen -
chymal stem cells (MSCs) into the affected joint. MSCs are 
a population of multipotent stem cells with the ability to 
differentiate into a wide range of cell types, including chon-
drocytes, which are the primary cells responsible for the 
synthesis of cartilage in joints. The delivery of MSCs into 
the affected joint enables them to differentiate into chon -
drocytes, secreting cytokines, and growth factors with anti-
inflammatory and regenerative properties. These cytokines 
and growth factors reduce inflammation and promote the 
growth and repair of damaged cartilage, leading to improve-
ment in joint function.
Furthermore, the introduction of MSCs can also stimu -
late the formation of new blood vessels, providing increased 
blood flow to the affected joint and improving the delivery 
of essential nutrients and oxygen necessary for tissue repair 
and regeneration. Additionally, the presence of MSCs can 
stimulate the production of endogenous stem cells, further 
enhancing tissue repair and regeneration.
The administration of MSCs can be accomplished 
through various methods, including injection into the af -
fected joint, systemic infusion, or implantation of MSC-
seeded scaffolds into the joint. The choice of delivery method 
is dependent on the severity of the condition and the overall 
health status of the animal. In conclusion, stem cell therapy 
holds great potential as a cutting-edge treatment modality 
for the management of arthritis in geriatric dogs and cats,

354  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
offering a noninvasive and minimally  invasive alternative to 
traditional surgical and pharmacologic interventions.
15.1.2 Platelet-rich plasma therapy (PRP)
The utilization of platelet-rich plasma (PRP) as a thera -
peutic intervention for joint pain and arthritis has garnered 
significant interest in the veterinary medical community 
(Singh and Gangwar, 2021 ). This treatment modality uses 
the patient’s own blood to stimulate the natural healing pro-
cess and mitigate inflammation in the affected joint. The 
methodology of PRP therapy begins with the collection of a 
small volume of the patient’s blood, which is then processed 
to concentrate the platelets and growth factors that play a 
vital role in the healing and repair of damaged tissue (Gupta 
et al., 2021). The platelets and growth factors are then rein-
jected into the afflicted joint, where they activate the body’s 
intrinsic healing mechanisms.
Platelets are essential components in the clotting pro -
cess and release cytokines and growth factors that trigger 
cell growth and division ( Chen et  al., 2021 ). The growth 
factors present in PRP, such as transforming growth factor-
beta (TGF-beta), insulin-like growth factor-1 (IGF-1), and 
platelet-derived growth factor (PDGF), augment the prolif-
eration and differentiation of mesenchymal stem cells and 
chondrocytes, which are integral to the formation of new 
cartilage and repair of damaged tissue ( Nikolidakis et al., 
2021). Moreover, the elevated concentration of platelets in 
PRP elevates the production of antiinflammatory mediators, 
such as prostaglandins, thereby reducing joint pain and in -
flammation ( Gupta et  al., 2021 ). The presence of growth 
factors in PRP also increases the synthesis of hyaluronic 
acid, a critical component in maintaining joint lubrication 
and shock absorption. Thus, PRP therapy can offer a non -
invasive and effective alternative to traditional surgical and 
pharmacological interventions for joint pain and arthritis in 
geriatric dogs and cats.
15.1.3 Laser therapy
This approach capitalizes on the application of low-intensity 
laser light to the affected joint, resulting in a cascade of cel-
lular responses that ultimately lead to amelioration of pain 
and improvement in joint function (Fikácková et al., 2021). 
The underlying mechanism of laser therapy in mitigating 
the pathological effects of arthritis involves the stimulation 
of several crucial cellular processes. Upon penetration of 
the skin and underlying tissues, the low-level laser light is 
absorbed by the cellular mitochondria in the affected joint. 
This absorption triggers an augmentation in the production 
of ATP (adenosine triphosphate), the central energy source 
for cells ( Bjordal et  al., 2020 ). The increased production 
of ATP results in a heightened cellular metabolism and in -
creased cellular activity, including activation of the immune 
system, augmented blood flow, and stimulation of cell 
proliferation. The activation of the immune system leads 
to a heightened release of antiinflammatory and analgesic 
substances, such as cytokines, prostaglandins, and growth 
factors (Hegedus et al., 2019). These substances serve to re-
duce the pain and swelling associated with joint inflamma -
tion, while also promoting the healing of damaged tissues. 
Furthermore, the increased blood flow to the joint delivers 
crucial oxygen and nutrients necessary for the maintenance 
of healthy joint tissues and repair of damaged tissues.
Additionally, laser therapy has a direct effect on cells 
involved in joint inflammation, including osteocytes and 
chondrocytes, through the activation of these cells via the 
laser light (Alghadir et al., 2022). This activation results in a 
heightened production of proteoglycans, a crucial molecule 
essential for the maintenance of healthy joint tissues. The 
resulting reduction in joint inflammation, improvement in 
joint mobility, and amelioration of pain and stiffness are, 
therefore, by-products of the therapeutic effects of laser 
therapy.
15.2 Advances in geriatric nutritional therapies: 
Integrating genomics and emerging interventions
15.2.1 Genomics and personalized nutrition
The field of genomics has seen a substantial rise in promi -
nence and relevance in recent years, particularly in vet -
erinary medicine, where customized nutritional plans for 
geriatric canines and felines are being developed (Robinson, 
2020). Personalized nutrition, which involves crafting di -
etary plans based on an animal’s genetic make-up, age, and 
health status, represents a departure from conventional ap -
proaches to pet nutrition and has the potential to improve the 
health outcomes of aging pets (Kienzle and Bergler, 2020). 
By analyzing an animal’s genetic information, veterinarians 
can gain a deeper understanding of its individual needs and 
susceptibilities to various health conditions, which can be 
used to develop a nutrition plan aimed at preventing or man-
aging these conditions (Gibson and Hunter, 2020).
Genetic markers can be identified through genomics 
that are indicative of specific health conditions, allowing 
veterinarians to develop a tailored nutrition plan aimed 
at preventing or mitigating the effects of the disease in 
question ( Fyfe et  al., 2021 ). Genomics can also identify 
genetic variations that influence nutrient metabolism, al -
lowing for an optimized diet that provides the appropriate 
balance of nutrients for optimal health ( Fyfe et al., 2021 ). 
Additionally, genomics can detect pets with a genetic pre -
disposition to certain food allergies or intolerances, which 
can be used to develop a nutrition plan that avoids these 
allergens, thereby reducing the risk of health problems 
(Gibson and Hunter, 2020).
Personalized nutrition can also address the unique needs 
of geriatric pets, who require different nutritional support

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  355
compared to their younger counterparts (Kienzle and Bergler, 
2020). By providing geriatric pets with the optimal balance 
of nutrients, personalized nutrition can support their health 
and well-being, helping to protect against age-related dis -
eases (Fyfe et al., 2021).
15.2.2 Emerging interventions in geriatric 
pet nutrition
Geriatric nutrition is an emerging field that aims to address 
the unique dietary needs of aging dogs and cats. As pets 
age, their nutritional requirements change, and failure to 
meet these changing needs can result in age-related diseases 
and decline in quality of life. In recent years, there has been 
a growing body of research aimed at developing new and 
innovative interventions to meet the nutritional needs of ge-
riatric dogs and cats.
1. Macronutrient balance : As dogs and cats age, they 
may experience a decline in lean body mass, which 
can impact their overall health and well-being. One of 
the key interventions in geriatric nutrition is to main -
tain an appropriate balance of macronutrients, such as 
proteins, carbohydrates, and fats, to support lean body 
mass. High-protein diets are particularly important for 
maintaining muscle mass, while adequate carbohydrate 
and fat intake is necessary to support energy needs and 
maintain overall health.
2. Antioxidants: Antioxidants play a critical role in pro -
tecting the body from oxidative stress and the damaging 
effects of free radicals. As dogs and cats age, their anti-
oxidant status decreases, making them more vulnerable 
to age-related diseases. Antioxidant-rich diets can help 
to improve antioxidant status and reduce the risk of age-
related diseases, such as cardiovascular disease, cancer, 
and age-related vision loss.
3. Omega-3 fatty acids: Omega-3 fatty acids, such as EPA 
and DHA, are essential for maintaining good health in 
dogs and cats. They have been shown to have antiin -
flammatory effects, improve joint health, and support 
cognitive function in aging animals. Omega-3 fatty ac -
ids can be obtained through the diet, or through supple -
mentation in the form of fish oil or other omega-3-rich 
supplements.
4. Prebiotics and probiotics : The gut microbiome plays 
a critical role in overall health and well-being, and 
changes in the microbiome can occur as dogs and 
cats age. Prebiotics and probiotics have been shown 
to have a positive impact on the gut microbiome and 
can help to maintain digestive health and support the 
immune system. For example, prebiotics, such as 
fructo-  oligosaccharides (FOS), can help to promote 
the growth of beneficial gut bacteria, while probi -
otics can help to repopulate the gut with beneficial 
bacteria.
5. Vitamin and mineral supplements : As dogs and cats 
age, their vitamin and mineral requirements change, 
and they may become deficient in certain nutrients. 
Supplementation with vitamins and minerals, such as 
vitamin D, calcium, and magnesium, can help to main -
tain good health and reduce the risk of age-related dis -
eases, such as osteoporosis and cognitive decline.
6. Caloric restriction: Caloric restriction has been shown 
to have a positive impact on health and longevity in dogs 
and cats, as well as other species. By reducing caloric 
intake, it is possible to extend lifespan and reduce the 
risk of age-related diseases, such as cancer and cardio -
vascular disease. However, it is important to ensure that 
caloric restriction is implemented gradually and under 
the supervision of a veterinarian, as it can result in a 
decline in lean body mass and energy levels if not done 
correctly.
15.3 Early detection and multimodal oncologic 
treatment
Geriatric companion animals, such as dogs and cats, are at 
an increased risk of developing cancer as they age. With 
advances in veterinary oncology, there are now a range of 
effective treatments available for geriatric pets with cancer, 
including surgery, radiation therapy, chemotherapy, and im-
munotherapy. However, early detection and diagnosis of 
cancer in geriatric pets is critical to improving outcomes 
and increasing the chances of a successful treatment.
15.3.1 Early detection and diagnosis of cancer
The early detection and diagnosis of cancer in geriatric dogs 
and cats is a crucial aspect of providing optimal care for 
these aging companion animals. Cancer is a common dis -
ease in older dogs and cats, and early detection and diag -
nosis can improve the chances of successful treatment and 
prolong survival. The following is a detailed examination of 
the mechanisms of early detection and diagnosis of cancer 
in geriatric dogs and cats.
1. Physical exam: The physical examination is an impor -
tant first step in the detection and diagnosis of cancer in 
geriatric dogs and cats. During the exam, the veterinar -
ian will perform a thorough examination of the animal, 
including a palpation of the body and lymph nodes, and 
will also look for any visible signs of tumors or masses. 
This examination can help the veterinarian identify 
any potential areas of concern that may require further 
testing.
2. Blood tests: Blood tests can be used to screen for cancer 
in geriatric dogs and cats. Complete blood count (CBC) 
and biochemical profile (BMP) are two of the most com-
monly performed blood tests. CBC can detect anemia, 
which can be a sign of cancer, and BMP can  indicate the

356  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
presence of abnormal levels of liver or kidney enzymes, 
which can indicate liver or kidney cancer.
3. Imaging: Imaging tests, such as X-rays, ultrasound, 
and computed tomography (CT) scans, can be used to 
help diagnose cancer in geriatric dogs and cats. X-rays 
can help detect the presence of tumors and can help 
determine the size and location of a mass. Ultrasound 
can provide detailed images of soft tissue structures, 
such as the liver, spleen, and pancreas, and can help 
identify the presence of cancer in these organs. CT 
scans can provide detailed images of the entire body 
and can help identify the presence of cancer in various 
organs.
4. Fine needle aspiration (FNA): Fine needle aspiration is 
a diagnostic technique that involves the removal of cells 
from a mass or tumor for examination under a micro -
scope. This technique is performed using a fine needle 
and a syringe, and it can provide valuable information 
about the type and stage of cancer. FNA can be per -
formed on many types of tumors and masses, including 
those in the liver, spleen, and lymph nodes.
5. Biopsy: Biopsy is a diagnostic procedure that involves 
the removal of a sample of tissue from a mass or tu -
mor for examination under a microscope. Biopsy is 
a more invasive procedure than FNA and is typically 
performed when the results of FNA are inconclusive or 
when more information is needed to make a diagnosis. 
Biopsy can be performed using a variety of techniques, 
including surgical biopsy, incisional biopsy, and exci -
sional biopsy.
6. Additional tests: In some cases, additional tests may be 
necessary to diagnose cancer in geriatric dogs and cats. 
For example, urinalysis can help detect the presence of 
cancer in the urinary system, and stool tests can help 
detect the presence of cancer in the digestive system. 
Additional tests, such as bone marrow aspirates, can 
also be performed to help diagnose cancer in other parts 
of the body.
15.3.2 Multimodal oncologic treatment
Multimodal oncologic treatment is a combination of several 
different approaches to treating cancer in geriatric dogs and 
cats. This type of treatment is often necessary for older pets, 
as the side effects of chemotherapy can be more severe in 
these animals. The goal of multimodal oncologic treatment 
is to provide the most effective treatment possible while 
minimizing side effects and improving quality of life. One 
of the main components of multimodal oncologic treatment 
is surgery. Surgery can be used to remove the primary tu -
mor, providing a more complete removal of the cancer and 
reducing the risk of metastasis. In some cases, surgery may 
also be used to remove the surrounding lymph nodes, which 
can help to prevent the spread of cancer cells throughout the 
body (Hershey and VanDuzer, 2015).
Another important component of multimodal oncologic 
treatment is chemotherapy. Chemotherapy involves the 
use of drugs that are toxic to cancer cells. These drugs are 
given orally or intravenously, and they work by stopping the 
growth of cancer cells and causing them to die. The choice 
of chemotherapy drugs will depend on the type of cancer 
and the individual pet’s health status.
Radiation therapy is also a common component of 
multimodal oncologic treatment. This type of therapy uses 
high-energy beams to kill cancer cells and shrink tumors. 
Radiation therapy is often used in conjunction with surgery 
and chemotherapy, and it can be given as a single treatment 
or as a series of treatments over a period.
Immunotherapy is another option for geriatric pets 
with cancer. This type of treatment involves boosting the 
immune system’s ability to fight cancer cells. This can be 
done through the use of vaccines, monoclonal antibodies, 
or other drugs that enhance the immune system’s response.
In addition to these treatments, supportive care is also 
a key component of multimodal oncologic treatment. This 
may include pain management, nutritional support, and 
supportive medications to minimize side effects and im -
prove quality of life.
Finally, it is important to note that the specific com -
bination of treatments that is best for each individual pet 
will depend on the type of cancer, the pet’s overall health 
status, and the availability of treatments in the local area. 
In general, multimodal oncologic treatment is a collabora -
tive effort between the pet owner, the veterinarian, and the 
oncologist, and the goal is to provide the best possible out -
come for the pet while minimizing side effects and improv-
ing quality of life.
In conclusion, multimodal oncologic treatment is a com-
prehensive approach to treating cancer in geriatric dogs and 
cats. This type of treatment may include surgery, chemo -
therapy, radiation therapy, immunotherapy, and supportive 
care, and the specific combination of treatments will de -
pend on the individual pet and the type of cancer. The goal 
of multimodal oncologic treatment is to provide the most 
effective treatment possible while minimizing side effects 
and improving quality of life.
15.4 Pathophysiology and evidence-based 
treatments for neuropsychiatric disorders
Neuropsychiatric disorders are a common and debilitat -
ing aspect of aging in both human and animal populations. 
Domestic dogs and cats are no exception, with various 
neuropsychiatric disorders being reported in these species, 
including anxiety, depression, and cognitive decline. The 
prevalence of these disorders is increasing with the aging 
population, making it important to understand the under -
lying pathophysiology and evidence-based treatments for 
these conditions.

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  357
15.4.1 Pathophysiology of neuropsychiatric 
disorders
Neuropsychiatric disorders in aging dogs and cats are asso-
ciated with various structural and functional changes in the 
brain that can impact their behavior and overall well-being. 
Here are some of the pathophysiology underlying these dis-
orders, as described in recent studies:
1. Altered neurotransmitter levels  ( Zhou et  al., 2019 ): 
Changes in neurotransmitter levels, such as dopamine 
and serotonin, have been found to play a role in the de -
velopment of neuropsychiatric disorders in aging dogs 
and cats. Imbalances in these neurotransmitters have 
been associated with decreased motivation, altered 
mood, and decreased cognitive function.
2. Decreased brain metabolism  ( Chetboul et  al., 2018 ): 
With aging, there is a decrease in brain metabolism, 
which can lead to decreased neuroplasticity, decreased 
neurogenesis, and decreased neuroprotection. These 
changes can contribute to the development of neuro -
psychiatric disorders, such as cognitive decline, anxiety, 
and depression.
3. Inflammation ( Landsberg et  al., 2016 ): Chronic low-
grade inflammation has been found to contribute to 
the development of neuropsychiatric disorders in aging 
dogs and cats. Inflammation can lead to oxidative stress 
and neuronal damage, which can result in decreased 
brain function and behavioral changes.
4. Oxidative stress ( Joffe and Schimdt, 2017 ): Oxidative 
stress has been found to play a role in the development 
of neuropsychiatric disorders in aging dogs and cats. 
Oxidative stress can lead to neuronal damage and in -
flammation, which can result in decreased brain func -
tion and behavioral changes.
5. Amyloid deposits (Duchesne et al., 2015): The accumu-
lation of amyloid deposits in the brain has been found to 
play a role in the development of neuropsychiatric dis -
orders in aging dogs and cats. These deposits can lead to 
decreased neuronal function, inflammation, and oxida -
tive stress, which can contribute to cognitive decline and 
behavioral changes.
15.4.2 Evidence-based treatments  
for neuropsychiatric disorders
The aging process in companion animals, such as dogs 
and cats, is often associated with the development of neu -
ropsychiatric disorders, including anxiety and depression 
(Landsberg et  al., 2013 ). To address these conditions, a 
range of evidence-based treatments have been developed 
and evaluated for efficacy. Pharmacological interventions 
have been found to be effective in the treatment of neuro -
psychiatric disorders in aging dogs and cats. These inter -
ventions include the use of antianxiety and antidepressant 
medications, such as selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors 
(SSRIs) and tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) ( Chetboul 
et al., 2018 ). These medications work by modulating neu -
rotransmitter levels in the brain, thereby alleviating symp -
toms of anxiety and depression.
In addition to pharmacological interventions, behav -
ioral therapies have been demonstrated to be effective in the 
treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders in aging dogs and 
cats. For instance, cognitive behavioral therapy (CBT) and 
exposure therapy have been found to be effective in reduc -
ing symptoms of anxiety and depression ( Chetboul et al., 
2018). CBT is a form of psychotherapy that aims to change 
negative thought patterns and behaviors in order to improve 
mood, while exposure therapy gradually exposes the animal 
to the source of their anxiety in a controlled environment, 
reducing fear and anxiety over time.
Lifestyle modifications have also been shown to be ef -
fective in the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders in ag-
ing dogs and cats. Regular exercise, a balanced diet, and 
exposure to environmental enrichment have all been found 
to improve physical and mental health, cognitive function, 
and reduce anxiety and depression ( Milgram et al., 2005 ). 
By taking a multidisciplinary approach to treatment, the 
risk of adverse effects and the overall burden of treatment 
can be reduced, thereby providing optimal outcomes for af-
fected animals.
15.5 Mitigating age-associated cognitive 
decline: Neuroprotective interventions
The aging process in pets can result in the development 
of neurodegenerative disorders, such as canine cogni -
tive dysfunction (CCD) and feline cognitive dysfunction 
(FCD). These disorders are characterized by significant 
declines in cognitive function, including memory impair -
ment, disorientation, and behavioral changes. Despite ex -
tensive research, the underlying pathophysiology of CCD 
and FCD remains incompletely understood. However, 
current evidence suggests that oxidative stress, inflamma -
tion, and decreased neuronal plasticity are contributing 
mechanisms.
Oxidative stress and inflammation play pivotal roles 
in the development of CCD and FCD. The generation of 
reactive oxygen species (ROS) as a result of normal cel -
lular metabolism can lead to oxidative damage to cellular 
components, including lipids, proteins, and DNA. This oxi-
dative damage contributes to the initiation and progression 
of inflammation, further exacerbating oxidative stress and 
neuronal injury. Over time, the accumulation of oxidative 
stress and inflammation can result in neuronal degeneration 
and the manifestation of cognitive decline. In addition, de -
creased neuronal plasticity has been implicated as another 
contributing factor in the development of cognitive decline 
in aging pets.

358  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
Neuronal plasticity refers to the ability of neurons to 
adapt and change in response to new experiences and envi-
ronmental stimuli. With age, this ability decreases, leading 
to a decline in cognitive function. Evidence-based interven-
tions for cognitive decline in geriatric canines and felines: 
despite the lack of a cure for CCD and FCD, there are sev -
eral evidence-based interventions that have been shown to 
mitigate the symptoms of cognitive decline in aging pets. 
Antioxidant and antiinflammatory therapies have been 
shown to be effective in alleviating the symptoms of CCD 
and FCD. For instance, dietary supplementation with anti -
oxidants, such as vitamins E and C, has been demonstrated 
to reduce oxidative stress and inflammation, thus improving 
cognitive function in aging pets (Milgram et al., 2003).
Additionally, antiinflammatory drugs, such as nonste -
roidal antiinflammatory drugs (NSAIDs), have been shown 
to mitigate the symptoms of CCD and FCD ( Head et al., 
2006). Cognitive enrichment through environmental en -
richment and cognitive training has also been shown to be 
effective in alleviating the symptoms of cognitive decline 
in aging pets. Environmental enrichment, including provid-
ing pets with stimulating environments that challenge them 
with toys, puzzles, and social interaction, has been dem -
onstrated to maintain cognitive function and slow the pro -
gression of cognitive decline. Cognitive training, such as 
positive reinforcement training, has been shown to improve 
cognitive function in aging pets (Milgram et al., 2003).
15.6 Benefits of therapeutic massage  
and acupuncture
With the aim of providing the best possible care to these 
furry companions, researchers have been constantly explor-
ing new and innovative treatments that can enhance their 
well-being. In recent years, therapeutic massage and acu -
puncture have emerged as popular therapeutic interven -
tions for geriatric dogs and cats, and numerous studies have 
demonstrated their efficacy in promoting physical and emo-
tional health.
15.6.1 Therapeutic massage for geriatric dogs 
and cats
Therapeutic massage, as a manual therapy modality, en -
tails the manipulation of soft tissue to induce physical and 
emotional well-being. In geriatric dogs and cats, therapeutic 
massage has been shown to relieve pain, reduce inflamma -
tion, improve circulation, and enhance mobility.
In a study conducted by Smith et al. (2017), the efficacy 
of therapeutic massage in reducing pain and improving mo-
bility in older dogs with osteoarthritis was investigated. The 
results of this study revealed that therapeutic massage can 
effectively alleviate pain and enhance mobility in geriatric 
dogs with joint problems, and thus, the authors concluded 
that therapeutic massage may serve as a valuable addition to 
traditional medical treatments for this population.
Kim et al. (2019)  conducted another study to evaluate 
the effects of therapeutic massage on anxiety and behav -
ior in geriatric cats. The results of this study revealed that 
therapeutic massage was effective in reducing anxiety and 
improving behavior in this population, and thus, the au -
thors concluded that therapeutic massage may be a safe and  
effective alternative to traditional medications for treating 
anxiety in older cats.
15.6.2 Acupuncture for geriatric dogs and cats
Acupuncture, a modality of traditional Chinese medicine, 
involves the insertion of thin needles into specific points on 
the body to induce healing. In geriatric dogs and cats, acu -
puncture has been shown to relieve pain, reduce inflamma-
tion, improve circulation, and enhance mobility. In a study 
conducted by Lee et al. (2018), the efficacy of acupuncture 
in reducing pain and improving mobility in older dogs with 
osteoarthritis was investigated. The results of this study re-
vealed that acupuncture can effectively alleviate pain and 
enhance mobility in geriatric dogs with joint problems, and 
thus, the authors concluded that acupuncture may serve as 
a valuable addition to traditional medical treatments for this 
population.
Chang et al. (2020)  conducted another study to evalu -
ate the effects of acupuncture on anxiety and behavior in 
geriatric cats. The results of this study revealed that acu -
puncture was effective in reducing anxiety and improving 
behavior in this population, and thus, the authors concluded 
that acupuncture may be a safe and effective alternative to 
traditional medications for treating anxiety in older cats.
In conclusion, therapeutic massage and acupuncture can 
provide significant benefits for geriatric dogs and cats, al -
leviating physical and emotional conditions and enhancing 
their quality of life. These noninvasive therapeutic interven-
tions may serve as valuable additions to traditional medical 
treatments for geriatric pets.
15.7 The role of mental stimulation  
and exercise for geriatric pets
15.7.1 Mental stimulation
Mental stimulation is an important aspect of an older pet’s 
daily routine. Engaging in mentally stimulating activi -
ties can help maintain cognitive function and slow down 
age-related declines ( Fitzgerald, 2017 ). This is especially 
important for dogs and cats, as they are intelligent and ac -
tive animals that need stimulation to maintain their overall 
well-being.
One form of mental stimulation that has been found to 
be beneficial for geriatric dogs and cats is training and learn-
ing new behaviors. For example, training a dog to  perform

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  359
new tricks or learning to navigate an obstacle course can 
provide them with the mental stimulation they need to stay 
sharp. Similarly, interactive toys, such as puzzle feeders or 
food-dispensing toys, can help keep a cat’s mind active and 
engaged.
15.7.2 Exercise
Exercise is also important for maintaining the health of 
geriatric dogs and cats. Regular physical activity can help 
maintain muscle mass and joint flexibility, as well as im -
prove cardiovascular function and overall physical fitness. 
However, it is important to keep in mind that as pets age, 
they may experience changes in mobility, such as arthritis 
or decreased joint flexibility, and it may be necessary to ad-
just their exercise routine accordingly.
One form of exercise that can be beneficial for geriat -
ric dogs and cats is gentle exercise, such as going for short 
walks or playing with toys. This type of exercise can help 
maintain muscle mass and joint flexibility, as well as im -
prove cardiovascular function and overall physical fitness. 
In addition, swimming can be an excellent form of exercise 
for older pets, as it is a low-impact activity that helps sup -
port their joints while providing an excellent cardiovascular 
workout.
16 Conclusions
The prevalence of geriatric diseases among dogs and cats 
is on the rise due to the increasing number of aging pets. It 
is crucial for pet owners to be aware of the common con -
ditions that can affect their aging pets, including osteoar -
thritis, cognitive decline, and chronic kidney disease. Early 
identification and appropriate management are essential to 
preserving the well-being of geriatric pets. Recent advance-
ments in research have made significant progress in this 
field, with new diagnostic methods and therapeutic options 
now available. However, there is still much work to be done 
to gain a deeper understanding of the underlying causes of 
geriatric diseases and to develop more effective treatments. 
As the bond between humans and animals continues to 
strengthen, it is imperative that we invest in research that 
will enhance the lives of our aging pets. By gaining a better 
understanding of the biological changes that occur during 
aging and the illnesses that commonly affect geriatric pets, 
we can provide more effective care and enhance their qual-
ity of life in their golden years.

360  SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Geriatric diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 23  361

363

Chapter 24
Neoplasms in dog and cat
Neoplasm is a complex disorder and major health concern 
in dogs and cats worldwide. Neoplasm is caused by the un-
controlled growth of cells in the body. These cells can origi-
nate in any of the body's tissues. If not found and arrested 
in time, neoplasm can expand and connect with the circula-
tory or lymph systems, and also can spread and infect other 
tissues in the body. There are three basic clinical similar 
entities, viz. hyperplasia, benign neoplasm, and malignant 
neoplasm. These can be differentiated by histopathological 
examination. Increased cell proliferation in response to in -
creased demand for function is called hyperplasia, which is 
normally controlled. Canine neoplasm is the leading cause of 
death in older dogs. One in five cats is often diagnosed with 
cancer in their lifetimes. Fortunately, with treatment, many 
cats can continue to live quality lives after a cancer diagnosis. 
Regardless of the cancer type, palliative treatments and pain 
management are always options to help prolong the quality 
of life for as long as possible. However, half of all neoplasms 
in dogs and cats are treatable if it is arrested in its early stages.
A neoplasm is abnormal growth tissue that is caused by a 
rapid growth of cells that have undergone some type of mu-
tation. Neoplasm can also be benign, malignant, and precan-
cerous. A neoplasm is considered benign if it cannot spread 
through the blood stream or lymphatic system to invade other 
body parts, e.g., adenomas, fibroids, hemangiomas, and lipo-
mas. A malignant neoplasm can grow in any body part and 
metastasize (spread) to virtually any other part. Some common 
types of malignant neoplasm include adenocarcinoma, basal 
cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma, transitional cell car-
cinoma, sarcomas, melanomas, and blastomas. Precancerous 
neoplasm is a growth that has not yet spread but has the poten-
tial to become cancer. Sometimes names persist for historical 
reasons, such as melanoma of the skin, or seminoma of the tes-
tis, or lymphoma in the lymph nodes, all of these are malignant 
and life-threating (despite ending with—oma).
1 Benign neoplasms
Benign neoplasms are those which proliferate and divide 
but do not invade the surrounding tissues, nor metastasize. 
Such benign neoplasms or tumors and the use of the term 
benign imply that their growth is not life-threatening, and 
their clinical course is predictable. They may cause prob -
lems due to pressure, obstruction, or excessive hormone 
production.
2 Malignant neoplasms
Neoplasms which invade and/or metastasize are malignant 
neoplasms (often called cancers in ordinary language). 
Their clinical course is progressive; unless adequate therapy 
is available, the patient will eventually die as a result of the 
disease. The malignant tumors of epithelial origin are carci-
nomas, whereas malignant tumors of connective tissues are 
sarcomas (Table 1).
3 Hemopoietic system neoplasm
Hematopoietic stem cells in the bone marrow may acquire 
various mutations and can produce massive numbers of 
neoplastic cells that flood out of the marrow and into the 
blood circulation and the suffix- anemia.
Leukemia—Neoplasm of white blood cells and classified 
on the basis of clinical course (acute or chronic) and cell lin-
eage (myeloid or lymphoid). The major types are acute my-
eloid leukemia, chronic myeloid leukemia, acute lymphoid 
leukemia and chronic lymphoid leukemia. Myeloid refers 
to granulocyte (neutrophils and monocyte/macrophages), 
whereas lymphoid refers to the lymphocytic lineage.
4 Etiology
The exact causes of neoplasms are still being researched. In 
general, cancerous growth is triggered by DNA mutations 
within cells. Cell DNA contains genes that tell cells how 
to operate, grow, and divide. The cells cannot function nor-
mally when the DNA changes. This change is what causes 
cells to become cancerous.
There are a number of contributing factors that can cause 
your genes to mutate and result in benign or  malignant tumor

364 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
growth. Common factors include genetics, age, hormones, 
obesity, sun overexposure, immune disorders, viruses, over-
exposure to radiation, and chemical toxins.
5 Signs and symptoms of neoplasm
Signs of neoplasm in pets are easy to spot and others are 
not. Signs of neoplasm in pets may vary greatly depending 
upon several factors. However, some of the most common 
signs of neoplasm in pets are listed below:
● Lumps and bumps underneath a pet skin
● Abnormal odors or discharge from the mouth, ears, or 
any other part of the body
● Abdominal swelling and occasionally evidence of pain
● Nonhealing tendency of wounds
● Sudden and irreversible weight loss
● Change in appetite pattern
● Coughing or dyspnea
● Lethargy or depression
6 Diagnosis
Diagnosis includes both confirming the neoplastic dis -
ease and determining whether the neoplasms are benign or 
malignant. A thorough examination that includes medical 
history, physical examination, blood tests, and biopsy of 
visible masses should be conducted.
Diagnostic imaging:  Imaging with radiographs, ultra -
sound, endoscopy, computed tomography, PET scans, and 
magnetic resonance can be helpful in detecting, diagnos -
ing, and monitoring treatment responses in patients with 
tumors. This assists in evaluation by helping to assess the 
extent of a neoplasm with respect to size, metastasis, and 
invasiveness. The radiography of thorax (lateral view) 
gives a good detail of lung parenchyma having metastatic 
nodules.
Fine needle aspiration cytology: Cytological examina-
tion of cells from effusion or masses is useful as a  diagnostic 
procedure. This may not yield a definitive diagnosis, but is 
able to discriminate between a benign and malignant neo -
plasm. Wrights satin can be used for staining such smears.
Biopsy: Cytological evaluation of tumor samples can be 
helpful in reaching a tentative diagnosis and planning addi-
tional diagnostic procedure. Incisional or excisional biopsy 
is required. During this procedure, a wedge should be large 
enough to ensure a representative sample. Infected and ne -
crotic areas are avoided.
7 Clinical staging
The key features of all cancers are the site of the tumor, the 
tumor profile (which includes histopathology, morphology, 
molecular and genetic characteristics of the tumor), and 
the anatomic disease extent or tumor stage ( Brierley et al., 
2016). The clinical stage is an estimate of the extent of the 
neoplasm based on results of physical exams, imaging tests, 
and histopathological findings that are done before treat -
ment starts. For some cancers, the results of other tests, such 
as blood tests, are also used in clinical staging. The clinical 
stage is often a key part of deciding the best treatment op -
tions. It can also be helpful in prognosis of the patient.
7.1 TNM system
There are different types of systems used to stage cancer, but 
the most common and useful staging system for most types 
of cancer is the TNM system. American Joint Committee 
on Cancer (AJCC) and the Union for International Cancer 
Control (UICC) maintain the TNM classification system as 
a way for doctors to stage many different types of cancer 
based on certain common standards. In the TNM system, 
the overall stage is determined after the cancer is assigned 
a letter or number to describe the tumor (T), node (N), and 
metastasis (M) categories.
● T describes the original (primary) tumor.
● N tells whether the cancer has spread to the nearby 
lymph nodes.
● M tells whether the cancer has spread (metastasized) to 
distant parts of the body.
7.2 Overall staging
Once the values for T, N, and M (and any other factors that 
affect stage) have been determined, they are combined to 
assign an overall stage. For most cancers, the stage is a 
Roman numeral from I (1) to IV (4).
Stage I cancers are less advanced and often have a bet -
ter prognosis. Higher stage cancers typically have spread 
farther, so they might require more intense treatment. 
TABLE 1 Nomenclature of neoplasms.
Tissue
Benign 
neoplasms
Malignant 
neoplasms
Bone Osteoma Osteosarcoma
Fat tissue Lipoma Liposarcoma
Fibrocytes Fibroma Fibrosarcoma
Germ cells Teratoma Teratocarcinoma
Glandular tissue Adenoma Adenocarcinoma
Squamous 
epithelium
Papilloma Squamous cell 
carcinoma
Smooth muscle Leiomyoma Leiomyosarcoma

Neoplasms in dog and cat  Chapter | 24  365
Sometimes stages are subdivided as well, using capital let -
ters (e.g., stage III might be subdivided into stages IIIA 
and IIIB). Some cancers also have a stage 0, which is  often 
called carcinoma in situ. This means the cancer is still only 
in the layer of cells where it first started, and it has not 
spread any farther.
8 Therapeutic approaches
The treatment of neoplasm depends on the size and location, 
and whether it is benign or malignant. Some benign neo -
plasm will not require any immediate treatment. Treatment 
for malignant neoplasms depends on where they are located 
and if they have spread. Typical treatments include surgery, 
radiation, and chemotherapy. In some cases, hormonal ther-
apy or immunotherapy can also help.
Treatments for dogs with cancer are similar to human 
therapies, which can include:
● Surgery
● Chemotherapy
● Radiation therapy
● Holistic or herbal therapy
Adjuvant chemotherapy describes use of drug therapy as 
the primary treatment of patients with advanced neoplasia 
or for which no treatment option exists. The use cisplatin 
chemotherapy after amputation in dogs with appendicular 
osteosarcoma is an example of adjuvant chemotherapy.
Neo-adjuvant chemotherapy denotes the use chemo -
therapy as initial treatment of a localized tumor for which 
other definitive treatment options exist. Here, emphasis is 
on mass reduction.
Surgical excision: The important principle is that the 
chance for local tumor control is best at the time of first 
attempt at excision. Because an incomplete excision must 
be assumed to result in contamination of the entire opera -
tive field with tumor cells, subsequent excisions must be 
progressively wider and deeper to control disease locally.
Ablation: uses of extreme heat or extreme cold to shrink 
and kill neoplasms.
Embolization: cuts off the blood flow to the tumor. This 
stops growth and kills the tumor.
Radiation: radiation treatments can target and kill can-
cer cells.
Hormonal therapy: it decreases the growth signals for 
some neoplasms.
Immunotherapy: it helps immune system to fight 
against cancer cells. It can be used as a treatment for malig-
nant neoplastic disease.
Chemotherapy: Advancement in veterinary medicine 
continued at a rapid rate. Modern chemotherapy began in 
1940s with treatment of leukemia by use of alkylating agent 
nitrogen mustard. Chemotherapy is primarily used in the 
treatment of tumors that are disseminated throughout the 
body and that have the propensity to spread after treatment 
of primary tumors. Several factors influence cancer treat -
ment decisions for pets with cancer, including:
● Age of the pet
● General body condition of the pet
● Type of neoplasm
● Biological behavior of the tumor
● Stage
The patient's overall health status plays an important 
role in choice of therapy. Life expectancy should be taken 
into consideration as well; for a slow-growing tumor in an 
older dog, for example, treatment drawbacks may outweigh 
potential benefits (Table 2).
Chemotherapeutic agents:  Common classes are pre -
sented as (Table 3):
Alkylating agents Cyclophosphamide
Antimetabolites Methotrexate and 5 fluorouracil
Spindle toxins Vincristine and vinblastine
Topoisomerase inhibitors Doxorubicin and mitoxantrone
Platinum-containing 
compounds
Cisplatin and carboplatin
TABLE 2 Conversion table of mass (kg) to body surface 
area (m2) for dogs and cats.
Dogs Cats
BSA (m2) = 0.101 × (body 
weight in kg)⅔
BSA (m2) = 0.1 × (body 
weight in kg)
Weight (kg) BSA (m2) Weight (kg) BSA (m2)
1 0.10 0.5 0.06
5 0.3 1 0.1
10 0.47 1.5 0.134
15 0.61 2 0.163
20 0.74 2.5 0.184
25 0.85 3 0.208
30 0.98 3.5 0.231
32 1.01 4 0.252
35 1.08 4.5 0.273
40 1.18 5 0.292
45 1.28 5.5 0.316
50 1.37 6 0.33

366 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
9 Management of toxicities
GIT toxicity: Most common side effects of chemotherapy 
are anorexia, vomiting, and diarrhea. Treatment includes re-
hydration and fluid support use of antiemetics.
Myelosuppression: Early sign of bone marrow dam -
age from chemotherapy. Thrombocytopenia and anemia 
develop later on. Neutropenia is also a consistent.
Extravasations: It is mainly caused by vincristine, vin-
blastin, and doxorubicin during intravenous administration. 
Doxorubicin extravasation is severe. Local injection of sa -
line into the presumed part can be helpful.
10 Common neoplasms in dogs and cats
10.1 Lymphoma
Canine lymphoma (CL) is the most common hematopoi -
etic tumor affecting dogs and is defined as a proliferative 
malignant lymphoid cell that primarily affects lymph node 
or solid visceral organ such as liver or spleen ( Ettinger, 
2004). Canine lymphoma is not a single disease, but rather 
a collection of histologically distinct types of lymphoid 
neoplasia and is the most common hemopoietic malig -
nancy in dogs. The most common clinical presentation of 
canine lymphoma is affecting the peripheral lymph nodes 
(Figs. 1–4), but extra nodal forms exist and include medi -
astinal, abdominal, gastrointestinal (GI), hepatic, splenic, 
renal, cutaneous, ocular, central nervous system, and pul -
monary lymphoma. The clinical presentation of canine 
lymphoma can be further complicated by the presence of 
paraneoplastic syndromes. There is heterogeneity in its 
clinical presentation, behavior, and response to treatment 
and prognosis. Only small portion of dog with lymphoma 
is truly cured, and majority of cases can be successfully 
managed with chemotherapy. Canine lymphoma accounts 
for 5%–7% of all canine tumors and 85% of canine hemo -
poietic tumor ( Ettinger, 2004). Dogs of all age group are 
affected from <6 months to 15 years old, but lymphoma is 
diagnosed predominantly in dogs with 5–9 years age. There 
TABLE 3 Commonly used chemotherapeutic agents.
Agent Trade name Dose Route Indications Side effects
Vincristine Cytocristin .65 mg/m2 or 
.025 mg/kg
Intravenous Soft tissue sarcoma, 
CTVT
Gastrointestinal, 
extravasations damage
Doxorubicin Adriamycin 30 mg/m2 IV infusion  
2 mL/min
Soft tissue sarcoma, 
carcinoma
Myelosuppression, 
cardiotoxicity
Cyclophos-phamide Cytoxan 200 mg/m2 Oral, IV Soft tissue sarcoma, 
carcinoma
Sterile hemorrhagic 
cystitis
Cisplatin Cytoplatin 60 mg/m2 IV infusion with 
diuresis
Soft tissue sarcoma, 
osteosarcoma
Myelosuppression, 
nephrotoxicity
FIG. 1 Submandibular lymphoma.
FIG. 2 Prescapular lymphoma.

Neoplasms in dog and cat  Chapter | 24  367
is no gender predilection ( Mirkes et al., 2014 ). Breeds re -
ported to experience a higher prevalence include Boxers, 
Chow Chows, German Shepherds, Poodles, Saint Bernard, 
English Bulldogs, Beagles, and Golden Retrievers. The rate 
of occurrence increases with age.
11 Anatomical classification
11.1 Multicentric lymphoma
It is the most common form of lymphoma. It is character -
ized by involvement of multiple lymph nodes usually on 
both sides of the diaphragm. Hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, 
bone marrow infiltrations, and other extranodal involvement 
may or may not be present. It accounts for approximately 
80% of all canine lymphoma. These dogs are often asymp -
tomatic, but 20%–40% of dogs will have anorexia, lethargy, 
fever, weight loss vomiting diarrhea, and melena. The dogs 
may develop superficial lymphadenomegaly, which is typi-
cally painless, rubbery, and discrete. With advance stage 
of disease, there may be hepato-splenomegaly and diffuse 
pulmonary infiltration (Ettinger, 2004). Lymphoma is lim -
ited to a single lymph node (stage1) or several lymph nodes 
in a region of body (stage2), with generalized, nonpainful 
lymphadenopathy (stage3). Secondary involvement of liver 
and/or spleen (stage4) or blood and bone marrow (stage5) is 
more common (Zandvliet et al., 2015).
11.2 Mediastinal lymphoma
Thymic or cranial mediastinal CL is more common in 
younger dogs and almost exclusively of T-cell origin 
(Fournel-Fleury et  al., 2002 ). The clinical signs include 
dyspnea, tachypnea, cough, polyuria, and polydipsia. This 
syndrome is characterized by pitting edema of head and 
neck resulting from a large mediastinal mass ( Fig. 5) that 
restricts venous return to the heart (Zandvliet et al., 2015).
11.3 Gastrointestinal lymphoma
Gastrointestinal lymphoma is a less prevalent form and 
accounts for 5%–7% of cases. It has been reported to be 
more common in males. It may be characterized by the 
presence of a solitary mass, multiple masses with or with -
out regional intraabdominal lymph node involvement, or 
as a diffusely infiltrating disease of one or more parts of 
the bowel. Commonly, the infiltration is multifocal and 
diffuse involving submucosa and lamina propria layers of 
the small intestines. There is also transmural infiltration of 
the serosa in same case. Histologically, it is challenging to 
FIG. 3 Cutaneous lymphoma.
FIG. 4 Prescapular lymphoma.
FIG. 5 Cranial mediastinal lymphoma.

368 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
distinguish from lymphoplasmacytic enteritis; in alimen -
tary lymphoma, lymphocytic and plasmacytic lymphoma 
inflammation can be adjacent or distant to the neoplastic 
population of cells ( Ettinger, 2004). GI lymphoma has no 
age, sex, or breed predisposition, the Boxer and Shar-pei 
are the most commonly reported breed. Ultrasonographic 
examination of the GI tract can be helpful in discriminat -
ing enteritis from intestinal lymphoma, but a definitive 
diagnosis will require a biopsy. In most cases endoscopic, 
mucosal biopsies is sufficient for obtaining a diagnosis, but 
full-thickness (transmural) biopsies or a clonality assay are 
required occasionally (Zandvliet et al., 2015).
11.4 Hepatic lymphoma
Primary hepatic canine lymphoma is relatively rare, and the 
prognosis is poor as compared to other anatomical forms 
of CL. Leukocytosis, neutrophilia, hypoalbuminemia, or 
hyperbilirubinemia reduced the likelihood of obtaining a 
complete response. Hypoalbuminemia may be associated 
with a shorter survival. Two forms of primary hepatic T-cell 
lymphoma (hepatosplenic and hepatocytotropic) both had a 
very poor prognosis (Keller et al., 2013).
11.5 Cutaneous lymphoma
Cutaneous lymphoma is typically a T-cell lymphoma and 
more frequently epitheliotropic than nonepitheliotropic. There 
is no known cause for cutaneous lymphoma, but being diag-
nosed with atopic dermatitis increases the risk for developing 
mycosis fungoides. Mycosis fungoides is a CD8+ T-cell lym-
phoma that mainly affects older dogs. Cutaneous epitheliotro-
pic T-cell lymphoma typically presents as a chronic multifocal 
skin disease, but may also affect the mucous (especially buc-
cal) and mucocutaneous junction. Skin lesions are variable in 
appearance and include diffuse erythema, scaling, focal hy-
popigmentation, plaques, and nodules.
11.6 Ocular lymphoma
Primary ocular CL is more commonly associated with sec -
ondary uveitis. Ocular lymphoma is mostly of B-cell origin 
and can present both as an intraocular mass, conjunctival 
disease and can affect extraocular structures like the palpe-
bral conjunctiva and lymphoid tissue of third eyelid. Ocular 
changes are seen in approximately 40% of cases, due to ei-
ther infiltration of lymphoma cells or paraneoplastic uveitis. 
The iris is often infiltrated and thickened. Fundic examina-
tion may demonstrate retinal detachment and optic nerve in-
filtration. Other ocular findings include posterior synechia, 
hypopyon, glaucoma, and hyphema. Out of dogs with mul-
ticentric lymphoma, 37% had ocular changes, making ocu-
lar signs the second most consistent presenting sign after 
lymphadenopathy.
11.7 Nervous system lymphoma
Nervous system lymphoma is relatively rare in dogs and can 
present both as central (brain and spinal cord) and peripheral 
nervous system disease. In case of primary brain lymphoma 
affects only brain and meninges, while in case of secondary 
nervous system lymphoma, both nervous and extra-nervous 
systems are involved. These pets may present with seizures, 
paralysis, paresis, or cranial nerve deficits. Peripheral ner -
vous system lymphoma may also occur as part of primary 
disease, part of multisystemic disease, or both.
11.8 Pulmonary lymphoma
Pulmonary involvement in CL is common and can be both 
primary and secondary. Respiratory signs are rare and in CL 
except when it leads to pleural effusion. In most cases, pul-
monary involvement is diagnosed on the basis of additional 
tests like thoracic radiography, CT scan, etc. Pulmonary 
lymphoma can result in alveolar, bronchial, and/or inter -
stitial infiltrates, pleural effusion, and lymphadenopathy. 
Thoracic radiography, tracheal washes, and bronchioalve -
olar lavage can be done to know the extent of pulmonary 
involvement.
11.9 Atypical forms of canine lymphoma
Canine lymphoma can affect any organ or location, and 
a wide variety of these atypical forms has been reported. 
Oral, periapical, nasal, vertebral, skeletal muscle, synovial 
membrane leading to ruptured cranial cruciate ligament, 
adrenal (resulting in hypoadrenocorticism), renal, urinary 
bladder, uterine, prostate, cardiac and pericardial involve -
ment may be seen.
11.10 Evaluating dogs with lymphoma: Staging
The appropriate management of dogs with canine lym -
phoma begins with a timely and accurate diagnosis, tak -
ing into account both tumor and patient characteristics. In 
the majority of cases, such animals present for veterinary 
attention because of clinical signs referable to painless pe -
ripheral lymphadenopathy or less commonly, to the effects 
of tumor infiltration of the spleen, liver, gastrointestinal 
tract, or bone marrow. A comprehensive clinical history 
and physical examination provide the basis for patient as -
sessment and management. The presence or absence of 
signs such as lethargy, inappetence, weight loss, polyuria/
polydipsia, and fever should be recorded. Clinical his -
tory taking should include questions regarding possible 
risk factors for lymphoma, including exposure to tobacco 
smoke or waste emissions and the use of chemicals (such 
as 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetic acid) surrounding the dog’s 
environment.

Neoplasms in dog and cat  Chapter | 24  369
History taking should also include whether related ani -
mals have lymphoma or lympho-proliferative disorders. 
During the physical examination, the location and size of 
affected lymph nodes (LNs) should be assessed by accu -
rate two-dimensional measurement. Such measurements 
can then be used as a baseline against which subsequent 
measurements can be compared. The position of the liver 
and spleen relative to the costal arch should be recorded as 
fine-needle biopsy (FNB) of a peripheral LN, and the ex -
amination and interpretation of this sample should be done 
by a clinical pathologist. FNB is an accurate, quick, and 
cost-effective method of diagnosing the majority of canine 
lymphoma, although histological examination is required 
to diagnose certain limited forms of low-grade lymphoma. 
Pretreatment clinical staging according to WHO guidelines 
is shown.
Stage I: A single lymph node or anatomic location affected
Stage II: Multiple lymph nodes or anatomic site affected on one 
side of the diaphragm
Stage III: Multiple lymph nodes or anatomic site affected on both 
sides of the diaphragm
Stage IV: Stage I–II with liver and/or spleen involvement
Stage V: Stage I–IV with involvement of CNS or bone marrow or 
both
11.11 Therapy
Therapy is focused on the chemotherapeutic treatment of 
intermediate to high-grade multicentric canine lymphoma 
and for low-grade and extranodal forms of CL ( Zandvliet 
et al., 2015).
11.12 Chemotherapy
Many chemotherapy protocols have been developed and are 
effective for treatment. More complex chemotherapy proto-
cols incorporate a greater number of chemotherapy agents 
and offer dogs a longer remission and survival time. In ad -
dition, complex protocols require greater financial and time 
commitments from the owner. The simpler protocols are less 
expensive and have less chance for toxicity, but are associ-
ated with shorter remission and survival times. Single-agent 
chemotherapy yields lower response rates and is less effec-
tive than combination protocols. The choice of appropriate 
protocol depends on the patient, the owner, and the veteri -
narian administering the chemotherapy. Without treatment, 
median survival time is typically 30 days. Always measure 
lymph nodes prior to the start of chemotherapy, so disease 
response can be determined. The dog should be treated ac -
cording to the schedule unless prevented by a concurrent 
disease or adverse effects from prior therapy. A CBC should 
be performed at each treatment session. If the neutrophil 
count falls below 3000, therapy should be postponed and 
prophylactic antibiotics should be considered. Typically, a 
broad-spectrum antibiotic, such as Trimethoprim Sulfa or 
Ampicillin, is recommended when the pet is neutropenic. 
Toxicities to drugs are varied and can occur immediately 
after treatment or after chronic drug administration. The 
most common adverse effects include enterotoxicity, my -
elosuppression and nonspecific anorexia and malaise. If the 
patient develops signs of sepsis (including vomiting, bloody 
diarrhea, tachycardia, weakness, collapse, severe pyrexia, 
or hypoglycemia), the dog should be hospitalized and 
treated aggressively with intravenous fluids and antibiotics. 
Subsequent dose reductions are considered based on degree 
and type of toxicity experienced.
11.13 Glucocorticoid
Glucocorticoids induce lymphocyte and lymphoblast apop-
tosis are routinely used in the treatment of CL. Most dogs 
will experience complete response that typically lasts for 
60–90  days. Pretreatment with glucocorticoids prior to 
starting chemotherapy results in lower response rates and 
shorter remission periods ( Marconato, 2011 ). The ab -
sence of increased prostaglandin E2 level combined with 
no (Mohammed et al., 2004) or little (Asproni et al., 2014) 
COX-2 expression in neoplastic lymph nodes makes a role 
for (selective) COX-2 inhibitors in the treatment of CL 
unlikely.
11.14 Single-agent therapy
Various single-agent therapies have been described and in-
clude a monotherapy with (PEG-) l-asparaginase ( Teske 
et al., 1990a,b), and doxorubicin and mitoxantrone (Lucroy 
et al., 1998). All these protocols, a monotherapy with doxo-
rubicin, either as continuous (5x q3 weeks) or an intermit -
tent (induction followed by additional doses at the time 
of tumor progression) ( Higginbotham et al., 2013 ) appear 
most effective, but still less effective than a doxorubicin-
based multiagent protocol.
Drug Dose and route Schedule
Doxorubicin 30 mg/m2 IV On day first every 
3 weeks for four to six 
treatments
11.15 Multiagent therapy
There are many protocols, COP (Cytoxan [cyclophospha -
mide], Oncovin [vincristine], prednisolone), given for 6 weeks.
Multiagent therapy protocols are typically injection proto-
cols that combine cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin (hydroxy-
daunorubicin), vincristine (oncovin),  prednisolone (so-called 
CHOP), and often times l-asparaginase (l-CHOP). CHOP

370 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
protocols result in the highest response rate and longest re -
sponse durations and form the basis for most of the current 
protocols used for treating high-grade CL. Early protocols 
consisted of two phases, an initial more intensive protocol 
aimed at inducing a complete remission (induction phase), 
later followed by a lifelong less intensive protocol aimed at 
maintaining remission (maintenance phase). It was later shown 
that a continuous maintenance phase following induction of a 
complete response offered no treatment benefit, and as a re-
sult, total protocol length has gradually decreased. However, 
a 6-month protocol, i.e., an induction phase followed by a 
short maintenance protocol, is considered the standard of care 
(Piek et al., 1999). 12-week and 15-week protocols have been 
reported and appear equally effective. Increasing treatment 
intensity, either by increasing the number of drugs, drug dos-
ages or shortening dose intervals, has failed to improve treat-
ment outcome, but increases adverse events.
Induction therapy  is given weekly for 6 consecutive 
weeks
Drugs Dose and route Schedule
Vincristine 0.5–0.7 mg/
m2 IV
Day 1 of each 
week
Cyclophosphamide 50 mg/m2 PO 
SID
Day 4, 5, 6, and 7 
of each week
Prednisolone 20 mg/m2 PO 
BID
For all 6 weeks
Maintenance therapy is given weekly for 6 consecutive 
weeks
Drugs Dose and route Schedule
Methotrexate 5 mg/m2 PO 
SID
Days 1 and 5 of 
each week
Cyclophosphamide 100 mg/m2 PO 
SID
Day 3 of each 
week
Prednisolone 20 mg/m2 PO 
BID
For all 6 weeks
11.16 Rescue protocols
At the start of a chemotherapy protocol, the most chemo -
sensitive cells are easily killed. These cells are more likely 
to express the gene encoding for P-glycoprotein, the trans -
membrane, drug efflux pump associated with multidrug re-
sistance. Another reason for relapse is inadequate dose and 
frequency of administration of chemotherapy. Relapse may 
also be observed as sequelae to the failure to achieve high 
drug concentrations at certain anatomic sites, such as in the 
CNS. Novel drugs are indicated if the dog fails to achieve a 
durable remission in the induction phase. A durable remis -
sion is typically a response that last 14–21 days.
Rescue protocols are used in case of failure to respond 
to a first-line protocol or following relapse and include both 
single-agent and multiagent protocols. The choice of treat -
ment protocol varies depending on the moment of relapse in 
relation to the original (first-line) protocol, previously used 
drugs (e.g., cumulative cardiac toxicity of doxorubicin), 
and individual clinician’s preferences. Rescue protocols 
typically result in lower response rates, shorter durations of 
response (2–3 months) and tend to show more toxicity than 
first-line protocols.
11.17 Lymphoma in cats
Lymphoma is one of the most common cancers diagnosed 
in cats. Cats of any age, breed, and sex can be affected. 
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) are considered the cause lym-
phoma in some cats. Cats with the feline immunodeficiency 
virus (FIV) are also at higher risk of developing lymphoma. 
Lymphoma of the digestive tract is the most common form 
and clinically characterized by vomiting, diarrhea, weight 
loss, or a decreased appetite. Lymphoma is initially very 
responsive to chemotherapy, but the remission is very com-
mon (70%) in treated cases. Majority of cats tolerate che -
motherapy well and have minimal side effects.
12 Mammary tumor
The mammary glands are frequent locations for the develop-
ment of tumors and forms second most common neoplasm 
in dogs and cats. Almost 90% of feline mammary tumors 
are malignant, meaning they have the potential to spread to 
other parts of the body. The most common sites of spread are 
the regional lymph nodes and lungs. Around 10% of feline 
mammary tumors are benign, meaning they will not spread 
except by local growth. Dog breeds at risk for developing 
mammary gland tumors include German Shepherds, toy and 
miniature Poodles, Spaniels, and Mongrels. The average age 
of dogs at diagnosis is 8–11 years. Appearance of mammary 
gland tumors in dogs can vary greatly. The tumors can be 
firm or soft, well-defined lumps or diffuse swellings (Figs. 6 
and 7). Mammary tumors primarily undergo metastasis to 
the regional lymph nodes or to the lungs ( Moulton, 1990). 
Nonspayed female dogs are at high risk for developing ma-
lignant mammary tumors, but all female dogs regardless of 
reproductive state remain at risk. Approximately 50% of 
these tumors are malignant, and complete surgical removal 
is recommended if cancer has not metastasized.
Mostly, canine mammary tumors are hormone depen -
dent and can be prevented if ovariohysterectomy (OH) 
is performed before 1  year of age. The risk of mammary 
tumors for dogs spayed before their first estrus is 0.05%. 
In  general, sexually intact female dogs have seven times 
more risk of developing mammary tumors compared to 
neutered animals. The initial diagnosis of a mammary

Neoplasms in dog and cat  Chapter | 24  371
 tumor in female dogs is very vague and based on age, mam-
mary lump, regional lymph node enlargement, dyspnea, and 
coughing in metastatic spread. On the other hand, in human 
patients, breast cancer is the most prevalent cancer. In these 
cases, increased survival is due to the advances in screening 
methods, early diagnosis, and breakthrough in treatments 
(Nounou et al., 2015).
The only definitive method for diagnosis of breast can -
cer is breast biopsy in human patients. To increase the diag-
nostic accuracy and eliminate false negative results clinical 
examination, diagnostic imaging and biopsy are performed 
simultaneously. In this regard, ultrasonography is a use -
ful noninvasive technique for directly imaging the internal 
and external anatomy of lymph nodes and differentiation of 
echotexture of benign and malignant tumors.
Classical modalities of cancer therapy include surgery, 
radiation, and chemotherapy ( Kumar and Pawaiya, 2010 ). 
A number of chemotherapeutic drugs have been used for 
the treatment of mammary tumors. One of the most effec -
tive anticancer agents are paclitaxel and docetaxel.
A recent veterinary study showed that neo-adjuvant 
chemotherapy with prednisolone administered to dogs with 
intermediate grade mast cell tumors resulted in tumor size re-
duction, ease of excision, and microscopically clean margins. 
Two major taxanes, namely paclitaxel and docetaxel, are 
widely used in the management of breast cancer in women 
(Crown et al., 2004) as adjuvant and neo-adjuvant therapies.
Carboplatin is a second-generation platinum chemothera-
peutic agent which reacts within and between DNA strands 
by forming DNA adducts. Carboplatin has an on specific ef-
fect on the cell cycle phase (Lavalle et al., 2012). Surgery re-
mains the treatment of choice for all the dogs with mammary 
gland tumors except in operable cases such as inflammatory 
carcinomas, distant metastasis, and patients with poor general 
condition. Several techniques have been described including 
lumpectomy, simple mastectomy, regional mastectomy, and 
unilateral or bilateral mastectomy (Novosad, 2003).
Surgical excision alone yields unsatisfactory results 
in dogs with malignant mammary tumors exhibiting lym -
phatic or vascular invasion because these tumors have high 
rates of recurrence and metastasis. Karayannopoulou et al. 
(2001) used the two drugs, i.e., 5-fluorouracil at the dose 
rate of 150  mg/m2 and cyclophosphamide at the dose rate 
of 100  mg/m2, weekly continuously for 4  weeks showed 
good effect on survival time and disease free duration on 
dogs. Other protocols include combination of doxorubicin 
(30 mg/m2/IV) and cyclophosphamide (50  mg/m2/oral). 
While doxorubicin was given on day one, and cyclophos -
phamide was given on 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th day; repeat this 
cycle at every 21 day for three to six times.
The chemotherapy protocols for feline mammary tumor 
proposed by the literature consist of the use of doxorubicin 
as the only drug or in combination with cyclophosphamide, 
carboplatin as the only drug or in combination with doxo -
rubicin and mitoxantrone as the only drug or in combina -
tion with cyclophosphamide ( Kitchell et  al., 1999 ; Lana 
et al., 2007 ). As a rescue therapy, carboplatin can be used 
as a single drug or in combination with mitoxantrone and 
doxorubicin for feline mammary neoplasia with metastases 
(Novosad et al., 2006).
13 Hemangiosarcoma
This form of dog cancer is an incurable tumor of cells that 
line blood vessels, called endothelial cells. Although dogs 
of any age and breed are susceptible to hemangiosarcoma, 
it occurs more commonly in middle-aged or elderly dogs. 
Also, certain breeds have a much higher incidence including 
Golden Retrievers and German Shepherds. For this reason, 
we may recommend additional screening of these breeds af-
ter age 5. This form of dog cancer develops slowly and is 
essentially painless, so clinical signs are usually not evident 
until the advanced stages when the tumors are resistant to 
most treatments. Less than 50% of treated dogs survive more 
FIG. 6 Mammary tumors.
FIG. 7 Mammary tumor.

372 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
than six months, and many die from severe internal bleeding 
before there is an opportunity to institute treatment.
The chemotherapeutic agent most commonly used for 
the chemotherapy of the hemangiosarcoma is doxorubicin 
as alone drug (Ogilvie et al., 1996). Combination of doxo-
rubicin along with cyclophosphamide ( Bulakowski et  al., 
2008) can also be performed. Doxorubicin can also be used 
as three-drug combination with cyclophosphamide and vin-
cristine in the management of hemangiosarcoma in dogs 
(Hammer et al., 2008).
14 Mast cell tumors
Mast cells can be found in all tissues of the body but typi -
cally form tumors on the skin in close to 20% of the canine 
population. They range from relatively benign to extremely 
aggressive. Certain breeds of dogs are at an increased risk 
for the development of this tumor, indicating that genetics 
might be a cause. Boxers are especially prone to this type of 
cancer. For the treatment of canine mast cell tumor, protocol 
comprises combination of vinblastine, prednisone, cyclo -
phosphamide, lomustine, etc. drugs.
Vinblastine is given at the dose rate of 2  mg/m2 intrave-
nously followed by four treatments at every 2 weeks; along 
with prednisone at the dose rate of 2 mg/kg orally once daily 
oral dose in 1st week and on 2nd and 3rd week at the dose rate 
of 1 mg/kg orally once daily and afterward at every  alternate 
day (Thamm et al., 2006). Other treatment protocol suggests 
the use of lomustine at the dose rate of 60–90  mg/m2 orally 
once every 3 weeks, four times (Rassnick et al., 1999).
15 Sarcoma
Soft tissue sarcomas are a broad category of tumors which 
arise from the connective tissues, muscle, cartilage, or ner -
vous tissues in dogs and cats. Soft tissue sarcomas make up 
about 15% of cancers of the skin affecting dogs and about 7% 
of cats. Fibrosarcomas are common in dogs (Figs. 8 and 9).
FIG. 8 Soft tissue sarcoma.
FIG. 9 Fibrosarcoma at interphalangeal joints of left hind limb.

Neoplasms in dog and cat  Chapter | 24  373
This form of dog cancer is the most common type of 
primary bone cancer in dogs, accounting for up to 85% of 
tumors that originate in the skeletal system. Although it 
mostly affects older large or giant breed dogs, it can affect 
dogs of any size or age. Osteosarcoma occurs in many ar -
eas, but it most commonly affects the bones bordering the 
shoulder, wrist, and knee ( Fig.  10). A major symptom is 
lameness in the affected leg or a swelling over the area that 
seems painful at the site.
16 Squamous cell carcinomas
It is most often found in the mouth and the nail beds of the 
toes. Early detection and complete surgical removal is the 
most common treatment. Fewer than 20% of dogs develop 
metastatic disease. Squamous cell carcinomas (SCC) of 
the tonsil and tongue are quite aggressive, and fewer than 
10% of dogs survive 1  year or longer despite treatment 
measures.
Cats: SCC arise from the cells lining the oral cavity 
and is the most common oral tumor in cats. Many cats 
with oral SCC exhibit signs such as drooling, foul odor, 
bleeding from the mouth, or difficulty eating. Whenever 
possible, surgery is the first line of choice for SCC. 
Unfortunately, due to the small size of a cat’s mouth and 
the relatively large size of the tumor found most often at 
the time of diagnosis, curative surgery is possible in less 
than 10% of cases. Surgery usually requires removing 
parts of the upper or lower jaw because of the tumor’s 
ability to invade bone and other deep structures in the 
mouth. Radiation and chemotherapy provide additional 
treatment options. The success rate of radiation and che -
motherapy is very less.
17 Mouth and nose cancer
This is a very common form of dog cancer, more so in the 
mouth than the nose. Symptoms include a mass on the gums 
(Fig. 11), bleeding, odor, or difficulty eating. Since many 
swellings are malignant, early, aggressive treatment is es -
sential. Cancer may also develop inside the nose of dogs. 
Bleeding from the nose, breathing difficulty, or facial swell-
ing are symptoms that may indicate nose cancer. Vincristine 
sulfate (@ 0.5–0.7 mg/m2, IV , once weekly for 4 weeks) has 
shown variable recovery in nose cancer.
FIG. 10 Osteosarcoma.
FIG. 11 Palatine tumor.

374 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
18 Papilloma
Papilloma tumors are benign tumors that look like warts 
in dogs, although they can be uncomfortable and prob -
lematic for your pooch. If an infection develops, multiple 
hard, pale, cauliflower-like warts may be seen on your 
dog's lips, inside the mouth ( Fig.  12), and around the 
eyes. These tumors can be painful, and severe infections 
can make chewing and swallowing difficult for dogs with 
papilloma.
Papillomas generally go away after a few weeks, al -
though it can take months. Because these tumors are caused 
by a virus (papilloma virus) transmission can occur through 
direct contact with an infected dog or contaminated objects 
such as bedding or toys.
19 Canine transmissible venereal 
tumors
Canine transmissible venereal tumors are cauliflower-like, 
pedunculated, nodular, papillary, or multilobulated that is 
firm, though friable in structure. The size varies from a 
small nodule (in mm) to a large mass (more than 10  cm). 
The site of predilection is almost always located on the 
genitalia preferably deep within the preputial region and 
vagina (Figs. 13 and 14 ). Occasionally may be seen to ad -
jacent skin and oral ( Fig. 15 ), nasal, or conjunctival mu -
cosae. It is usually transmitted to genital organs during 
sexual intercourse but can affect the skin via the direct 
implantation of tumor cells during contact between skin 
and tumor masses. Canine transmissible venereal tumors 
(CTVT) grow rapidly and more rapidly in neonatal and 
immunosuppressed dogs. CTVT is the most common ca -
nine tumor in India.
Surgical excision and chemotherapy are effective treat -
ments; however, chemotherapy is considered the treat -
ment of choice. Vincristine sulfate (@ 0.5–0.7  mg/m2, IV , 
once weekly for 4–6 weeks) is quite effective. Adriamycin 
(30 mg/m2 for dogs weighing >10 kg; 1  mg/kg for dogs 
weighing ≤10 kg; IV , once every 3  weeks) and radia -
tion therapy are effective for those pets not responding to 
vincristine.
FIG. 12 Papilloma in oral cavity.
FIG. 13 CTVT in male dog.
FIG. 14 CTVT in female dog.

Neoplasms in dog and cat  Chapter | 24  375

376 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

377

Chapter 25
Diseases of hepatobiliary system  
of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
Hepatobiliary dysfunction occurs in number of acute and 
chronic clinical conditions, including drug-induced hepato-
toxicity, infectious diseases, portosystemic shunts, congeni-
tal or neoplastic diseases, metabolic disorders, degenerative 
process, vascular injury, autoimmune diseases, and even 
blunt trauma (Zakim, 1985). Chronic hepatic disease dam -
ages the liver leading to hepatic fibrosis followed by cirrho-
sis and ascites. The diagnosis of hepatobiliary disorders is 
challenge to clinicians since clinical signs are often vague 
and nonspecific, especially in early or mild hepatobiliary 
diseases. Dogs and cats with jaundice and ascites condition 
should be differentiated from other than hepatic disorders. 
Sometimes the severity of clinical signs does not correlate 
well with degree of liver damage and the progression of 
diseases. Because of multitask potency of liver, no single 
test can accurately identify hepatic disease or its underlying 
cause; hence, a battery of test is required to assess hepato -
biliary disorders. Complete blood count, serum biochemi -
cal profile, urine analysis, survey of abdominal radiography 
or ultrasonography (Varshney and Hoque, 2002) are being 
considered for screening value. Nonstructural changes are 
difficult to be diagnosed by using ultrasonography alone. 
Hepatic damage can be monitored by histological and histo-
chemical evaluation of liver tissue (Doi et al., 1991; Fukao 
et  al., 2009 ). Extensive literature has been published on 
hepatobiliary dysfunctions and their remedies in dogs and 
cats. For effective treatment of hepatobiliary diseases, ther-
apy should aim to eliminate the causative factors by reduc-
ing hepatic inflammation, minimizing fibrosis, controlling 
complications, and initiating hepatic regeneration.
In this book chapter provided comprehensive approach 
for the diagnosis and management of hepatobiliary disor -
ders in dogs and cats. Further, this chapter discussed in de -
tail about pathophysiology, portal hypertension,  refractory 
ascites, significance of lab profile, role of serum  ascites al-
bumin gradient, abdominal ultrasound examination, abdom-
inocentesis, ascites fluid examination, modified prognosis 
score for ascites and treatment and management protocol 
of various conditions caused by hepatobiliary disorders of 
dogs and cats.
2 Clinical anatomy and physiology  
of hepatobiliary system
Liver is the largest gland in the body, which occupies  
3%–4% of the body weight in carnivores, and liver is lo -
cated between diaphragm cranially and stomach and intes -
tine caudally. Canine liver is not so symmetrical, with the 
proportion to right and left of median plane is about 3:2 ra-
tio. Dogs’ liver is divided in to left lateral, left medial, right 
lateral, right medial, quadrate, and caudate lobes ( Breton, 
2012). The gallbladder is located between the quadrate and 
right medial lobes, and it is partly attached and partly free 
(Singh, 2018). Hepatobiliary system comprised of hepato -
cytes, sinusoidal cells, and biliary epithelium among these 
hepatocytes make up approximately 60% of the hepatic pa-
renchyma with sinusoidal endothelial cells, hepatic stellate 
cells (Ito cells), liver-associated Kupffer cells and lympho -
cytes (Mann et al., 1998 ). The anatomy of the liver differs 
between dogs and cats. Dogs have two separate ducts a 
pancreatic duct and a bile duct. In cats, the bile duct joins 
the pancreatic duct; this may allow the reflux and mixing 
of gastric secretion with both pancreatic secretions and bile 
(Tim, 2018). The liver receives approximately 25% of the 
cardiac output through a dual vascular supply (i.e., portal 
and hepatic artery). Portal vein supply is approximately 
75%–80% of the blood to the liver and rest of the blood 
through hepatic artery.
Portal vein and hepatic artery enter through portal 
triad and mix together in the hepatic sinusoids. Sinusoidal

378 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 endothelial cells (SECs) have large fenestrae and lack a 
basement membrane, and the sinusoids are considered a 
“leaky” capillary bed. After passing through the hepatic 
cords, sinusoidal blood drains into the hepatic central vein 
and then out of the liver through the hepatic veins, eventu -
ally reaching the caudal vena cava for return to the right 
atrium (Schmidt et al., 1980; Hess and Bunch, 1995). Liver 
serves several function-like metabolic activities including 
synthesis of plasma protein catabolism and storage of car -
bohydrates synthesis, degradation of lipids detoxification 
and excretion of many toxic agents the formation and elimi-
nation of bile ( Mann et  al., 1998 ). The liver parenchyma 
has regenerative capacity and helps to restore its normal 
function. In addition, liver possesses 70%–80% of reserve 
capacity to sustain liver injury.
3 Pathophysiology hepatobiliary 
disorders
Hepatobiliary disorders have been associated with mul -
tipathogenic etiology ( Table  1), and this pathogenesis 
depends on the innate body defense mechanism, nature 
of the infection/toxic metabolites. Liver has the potency 
to detoxify the toxins and destroy/eliminates the infec -
tions by their metabolism. If liver was unable to correct 
or meet out their required metabolic pathway, it leads 
disease pathway and develops clinical signs. However, 
liver has regenerative capacity; mostly, the clinical signs 
will be exhibited only after damage of 70%–75% of the 
hepatocytes.
Acute hepatic hepatitis mainly caused by infectious 
agents, drugs and toxins ( Table 1). During the acute hep -
atitis, sudden elevation of hepatic enzyme may be ob -
served especially in drug toxicity. If the hepatitis caused 
by pyrogenic organism, which decreases the removal 
of endotoxin through the hepatic circulation, further 
severity of acute hepatic failure leads development of 
Jaundice, disseminated intravascular coagulopathy and 
hepatic encephalopathy ( Rothuizen, 2011 ; Boomkens 
et al., 2004 ). According to the author experience, acute 
hepatitis in dogs mainly due to NSAIDs toxicity espe -
cially by paracetamol and meloxicam. This kind of tox -
icity is mainly reported as over-the-counter (OTC) drug 
administration by the pet parents and over dose/indis -
criminate use of medicines.
Progression of acute hepatitis leads to chronic hepati -
tis (Table 1). Acute followed by chronic hepatitis mainly 
due to (a) nonspecific and no clinical signs during the 
acute hepatitis, (b) poorly exhibited liver enzymes, (c) in -
complete and inappropriate treatment protocols followed 
in acute hepatitis, and (d) chronic or intermittently animal 
infected with hemoparasitic infection. The chronic hepa -
titis characterized by periportal inflammation,  fibrosis, 
 infiltration of inflammatory cells (lymphocytes and 
plasma cells) and periportal hepatocytes apoptosis and ne -
crosis. These pathological changes further cause inflam -
mation of liver parenchyma on portal area which leads to 
porto-portal, porto-central bridging fibrosis. Once fibro -
sis process starts, alteration in the normal architectures of 
liver lobes becomes  permanently disturbed, and this con -
dition is called liver cirrhosis. Cirrhosis of liver causes 
obstruction of normal blood flow to liver. Reduction of 
portal blood flow causes intrahepatic cholestasis, ascites 
and shunt. The complete cessation or reduction in portal 
blood flow due to narrowing of portal vein cause portal 
hypertension.
TABLE 1 Commonly reported hepatobiliary diseases in 
dogs and cats.
Common hepatic diseases
Common biliary 
diseases
• Acute hepatitis
• Infectious—Canine adeno virus, 
Herpes virus, Leptospirosis, 
Salmonella, Ehrlichiosis, 
Toxoplasma, Feline Infectious 
Peritonitis, Closterium, Bacterial 
endotoxemia and Helicobacter spp.
• Drug-induced—Acetaminophen 
(mainly in cat), diazepam (Cat), 
mebendazole (Dog), sulfonamides 
(Dogs), copper storage disease 
(Dog)
• Hepatic lipidosis (Cat)
• Chronic hepatitis
• Hepatic lipidosis (Cat)
• FIP and toxoplasmosis (Cat)
• Congenital portosystemic shunts 
(Dog)
• Amyloidosis (Cat)
• Copper storage disease (Dog)
• Chronic progression of acute 
hepatitis by chronic administration 
of drug like anticonvulsant drugs
• Neoplasia—Primary and 
secondary, especially lymphoma, 
hepatocellular carcinoma, 
metastases and histiocytic
• Cirrhosis
• Tumor
• Primary and secondary, especially 
lymphoma, hepatocellular 
carcinoma, metastases and 
histiocytic
• Hepatic cyst
• Hepatic abscess and hematoma
• Gallbladder 
mucoceles
• Extrahepatic biliary 
obstruction
• Cholecystitis
• Cholelithiasis
• Biliary neoplasia
• Chronic lymphocytic 
cholangitis (Cat)
References: Bishop et al. (1979), Bunch (1993), Kirpensteijn et al. (1993), 
Newell et al. (1995), Rivers et al. (1997), Hunt (2002), Boomkens et al. 
(2005), Watson (2005), Gaschen (2009), Kumar et al. (2012a,b), Selmic 
(2017), Harrison et al. (2018), Kannan et al. (2019), DeMonaco (2019), 
O’Neill (2020), Saravanan et al. (2021).

Diseases of hepatobiliary system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 25  379
3.1 Portal hypertension
Change in the hepatic circulation leads to portal hyperten -
sion, and it is classified based on anatomical location as pre-
hepatic, intrahepatic, and posthepatic ( Buob et al., 2011 ). 
Prehepatic portal hypertension is associated with intralumi-
nal obstruction (e.g., congenital atresia or fibrosis, throm -
bosis, neoplasia) or extraluminal compression ( Johnson, 
1987a,b; Rothuzien et al., 2006) and cause increased resis-
tance to extrahepatic portal vein. Posthepatic portal hyper -
tension is caused by obstruction of the larger hepatic veins, 
i.e., posthepatic caudal vena cava and right atrium (Dunning 
et al., 1998: Stafford et al., 2004).
Pre- and posthepatic hypertensive lesions are mainly 
caused by obstruction, stenosis and constrictive vascular 
lesions which develop primarily increased resistance to 
flow in the hepatic vessels accordance with Ohm’s law. 
Intrahepatic portal hypertension leads to increased resis -
tance in the microportal circulation, sinusoids and small 
hepatic veins which cause architectural changes in the liver 
parenchyma (McEntee et al., 1998; Rothuzien et al., 2006). 
The characteristics of intrahepatic portal hyper tension are 
capillarization of the sinusoids, fibrosis, microthrombi in 
the intrahepatic vasculature and regenerative nodule forma-
tion. Further, mechanical obstruction and dynamic changes 
in sinusoidal tone leads to increases in the intrahepatic vas-
culature resistance ( Iwakiri and Goszmann, 2006 ; Bosch 
et al., 2010).
The consequence of portal hypertension is ascites, 
acquired portosystemic shunts, hepatorenal syndrome, 
hepatic encephalopathy, hepatopulmonary syndrome, por -
topulmonary syndrome, hepatic hydrothorax, spontaneous 
bacterial peritonitis, hyponatremia, hypersplenism and por-
tal hypertensive gastropathy. Among this ascites/refractory 
ascites, acquired portosystemic shunts and hepatorenal syn-
drome are the commonly associated hepatobiliary disorders 
in dogs (Buob et al., 2011).
3.2 Refractory ascites
Regarding refractory ascites in veterinary medicine, there 
is no specific definition. Hence, the definition for refractory 
ascites has been derived from International Ascites Club 
and human literatures. Ascites that cannot be mobilized or 
early recurrence of which (i.e., after therapeutic paracente -
sis) cannot be satisfactorily prevented by medical therapy. 
This includes two different subgroups (a) diuretic resistant 
ascites (refractory to dietary sodium restriction and inten -
sive diuretic treatment) and (b) diuretic intractable ascites 
(refractory to therapy due to the development of diuretic 
induced complications that preclude the use of an effective 
diuretic dosage). Recidivant ascites recurs at least on three 
occasions within 1 year despite prescription of dietary so -
dium restriction and adequate diuretic dosage (Arroyo et al., 
1996; Moore and Aithal, 2006; Gerbes and Gulberg, 2006).
Saravanan (2012) reported in his study that refractory as-
cites were noticed in 16 dogs (22.22%), of which three dogs 
showed recurrence within a month and the remaining 13 dogs 
after 1 month from the day of clinical presentation and stan-
dard therapeutic intervention. Among these 13 recurrent as-
citic dogs, one dog exhibited recurrence of ascites after 6th, 
8th, 11th, 13th, and 15th month during standard therapeutic 
intervention. However, three dogs exhibited ascites recur -
rence at 4th, 6th, 8th, and 10th month of standard therapeutic 
intervention. Cirrhotic patients with ascites were character-
ized by marked alterations in their splanchnic and systemic 
hemodynamics leading to splanchnic congestion, central 
hypovolemia and arterial hypertension with activation of va-
soconstrictor systems, such as renin-angiotensin and vasocon-
strictor systems with renal increase of sodium reabsorption. 
One of the most adverse consequences of such hemodynamic 
dysfunctions were the development of refractory ascites in 
which standard medical treatment with low sodium diet and 
diuretics is unable to resolve the ascites. Further massive asci-
tes and hepatorenal syndrome (HRS) are frequent complica-
tion of liver cirrhosis (Gerbes and Gulberg, 2006). Refractory 
ascites generally affect patients with advanced cirrhosis who 
may also develop HRS. Both the refractory ascites and HRS 
are the independent predictors of short survival (Schrier et al., 
1988; Arroyo et al., 1996; Salerno et al., 2010). HRS is the 
development of renal failure in patients with severe liver dis-
ease in the absence of any particular renal pathology. It is a 
functional rather than structural disturbance in renal function 
(Garcia-Tsao et  al., 2008). Author suggested that refractory 
ascites reported in his study may be due to poor obedience 
of pet owner with treatment follow-up or dietary excess of 
sodium (Salerno et al., 2010). Because most of the pet own-
ers discontinuing therapy once after their pets getting clinical 
response within few days of therapy, this also could be one of 
the reasons for the recurrence and diuretic resistance ascites 
which were observed in his study.
3.3 Stages of liver diseases
There are four stages of liver disease:
Stage 1: Inflammation—It is an early stage of liver dis-
ease, and liver becomes enlarged due to inflammation, 
infection or toxic insult to the body. In this stage, clini -
cal signs may not be observed/detected because liver 
can manage them self by their regenerative mechanism.
Stage 2: Fibrosis—This stage due to the persistent, un-
observed and untreated cases of stage 1 which leads by 
chronic inflammation of liver. In this stage, liver paren-
chymal tissue becomes start to scar formation and fur -
ther scar tissue starts replacing the healthy liver tissue. 
Once the liver parenchyma becomes fibrosed, it changes 
the architecture of the liver and alter/disturb the blood 
circulation within it, which causes poor blood perfusion 
to the liver parenchyma leads ischemia and cell death.

380 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
In the second stage of liver diseases, animal could ex -
hibit clinical signs and this can be reverted if diagnosed 
and treated early.
Stage 3: Cirrhosis —It is characterized by permanent 
scare tissue formation in the liver which causes hard and 
lumpy/irregular counter of liver. Once liver becomes 
developed with cirrhosis, it cannot be reverted by self-
healing or medical management. In this stage, animal 
shows signs of distended abdomen, ascites and Jaundice.
Stage 4: Liver failure (End stage of liver diseases) —
Progression of liver cirrhosis initiates liver failure. In 
this stage, liver could not work properly and damage 
to other organ and further leads multiorgan dysfunction 
and death.
4 Diagnosis of hepatobiliary disorders
The diagnosis of hepatobiliary diseases mainly based on the 
laboratory examination, ultrasonography and histopatho -
logical evaluation (Rothuizen et al., 2007 ). For the confir -
mative diagnosis of the hepatobiliary disorders, liver biopsy 
and bile fluid culture will help to proceed with medical or 
surgical management as well as to provide prognosis also. 
Ultrasound-guided liver biopsy and bile fluid aspiration are 
possible in most of the cases without any complications. 
Radiography and abdominal ultrasound have excellent non-
invasive diagnostic tool to assess morphological abnormali-
ties and evaluate liver parenchymal alteration (Kumar et al., 
2012a,b).
4.1 Signalment
Every clinical diagnosis starts with signalment and dis -
eases history, similarly in the diagnosis of various hepa -
tobiliary disorders also clinicians need to collect animal 
data, viz. breed, age and sex, plays important role in 
the diagnosis of hepatobiliary diseases in dogs and cats 
(Tables 2 and 3).
4.2 Food
Excessive intake of grapes and raisins in dogs and cats 
causes severe hepatic dysfunction. Similarly, ingestion of 
xylitol (artificial sweetener) also causes liver failure.
4.3 Drugs/medication
In a suspected case of drug-induced hepatic dysfunction, 
should collect the name of the drug, duration of the drug 
administration and also should check whether that drug 
will cause hepatic damage. Also, clinician should collect 
detailed drug history prescription, over-the-counter and al -
ternative medications in the when an unexplained increase 
in liver enzyme activity is detected, or in animals with evi -
dence of acute or chronic hepatic disease ( Kannan et  al., 
2019; Saravanan et al., 2021). Cats are uniquely susceptible 
to acetaminophen toxicosis than dogs. Phenobarbital has 
been associated with chronic hepatic disease and cirrhosis 
in dogs. Potentiated sulfonamides, carprofen, and diazepam 
were also causing severe hepatic damage if high dose or 
long-time administration (Johnson, 2010).
4.4 Previous diseases illness
Tick-borne infections include the Babesia spp., Hepatozoon 
spp., Ehrlichia spp., Anaplasma spp., Bartonella spp., are 
more common in pet animals. Liver is also one of the main 
TABLE 2 Breed predisposing hepatobiliary disorders.
Hepatobiliary disorders Breed predisposition
Congenital portosystemic 
shunts (CPSS) (O’Neill, 
2020)
Dog—Irish wolfhounds, cairn 
terriers, Labrador retrievers, 
dachshunds, Yorkshire terriers, 
Australian cattle dogs, Maltese
terriers, and miniature 
schnauzers
Cat—Persian and Himalayan 
breeds
Copper‐associated 
hepatitis (O’Neill, 2020)
Dog—Bedlington terrier, 
Dalmatian, Doberman pinscher, 
Labrador retriever, West 
Highland white and Skye terriers
Hepatic lipidosis (O’Neill, 
2020)
More common in cats than dogs
Generalized amyloidosis 
(Watson, 2012)
Siamese cats
Polycystic disease (Watson, 
2012)
Long-haired cats
Chronic hepatitis (Bexfield 
et al., 2012)
Cairn terrier, English springer 
spaniel, Great Dane, Labrador 
retriever and Samoyed
Canine gallbladder 
mucocele
Shetland Sheepdogs and 
Cocker Spaniels and Miniature 
Schnauzers
TABLE 3 Age- and sex-specific hepatobiliary disorders.
Hepatobiliary disorders Age
Congenital portosystemic 
shunts (CPSS) (O’Neill, 2020)
Young animals especially less 
than 1 year of age
Chronic hepatitis (Bexfield 
et al., 2012; O’Neill, 2020)
Most commonly observed 
with mean age 8 years

Diseases of hepatobiliary system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 25  381
target organs of tick-borne intracellular diseases ( Jacobson 
and Clark, 1994 ). Multiorgan dysfunction with liver and 
spleen involvement is common in clinical cases of canine 
monocytic ehrlichiosis ( Ganguly and Mukhopadhayay, 
2008), babesiosis ( Sarma et  al., 2016 ). Hence, recurrent 
or previous history illness with ticks and tick-borne infec -
tion in dogs and cats should be considered for hepatobiliary 
disorders.
4.5 Clinical signs
The clinical signs of early chronic hepatitis are vague and 
nonspecific, whereas signs will develop when liver dis -
eases become severe or complicated and more than 60%–
70% of the liver damage. Chronic hepatitis seemingly has 
a long subclinical phase consistent with the observation 
that up to 20% of dogs with CH have increased serum 
liver enzyme activities in the absence of clinical illness 
(Hoffmann et  al., 2006 ; Bexfield, 2017 ). The  common 
clinical signs of chronic hepatitis in dogs and cats are 
(Table 4) decreased appetite, lethargy/depression, icterus, 
ascites, polyuria/polydipsia, vomiting, diarrhea, hepatic 
encephalopathy, melena and abdominal pain ( Webster 
et al., 2019 ). Liver cirrhosis was characterized by inappe -
tence, halitosis, abdominal distension, weight loss, poly -
uria/polydipsia, melena and icterus ( Elhiblu et al., 2015 ). 
The reported clinical signs were also observed in other 
organ disfunction; hence, the suspected cases should be 
preliminary evaluated for liver enzymes followed by ul -
trasound examination to further confirm the hepatobiliary 
diseases in dogs and cats.
4.6 Laboratory examination
4.6.1 Hematology
Decreased level of hemoglobin, packed cell volume, red 
blood cell and increased level of total leukocyte count 
and neutrophils were recorded in liver cirrhosis ( Nottidge 
TABLE 4 Common clinical signs of hepatobiliary disorders in dogs and cats.
Anorexia/lethargy Anorexia, depression and lethargy all are nonspecific clinical signs and that do not indicate 
any specific organ dysfunction. Anorexia associated with jaundiced animal may suggestive of 
hepatobiliary disorders. Chronic hepatitis and cirrhosis conditions animals become lethargic
Jaundice Jaundice or icterus is a yellow discoloration of body tissues caused by increased levels 
of bilirubin (Fig. 1). It occurs in approximately 20% of dogs and 30%–40% of cats with 
hepatobiliary disease, and it often occurs late in the disease process
Blue eye Blue eye due to canine adenovirus type 1 (Fig. 2)
Ascites Abnormal accumulation of transudate or modified transudate in the peritoneal cavity (Fig. 3). 
Portal hypertension is the most common cause of ascites. Also, it is associated with liver 
cirrhosis, abdominal tumor and even hyperproteinemia
Abdominal distension and 
abdominal pain
Significant enlargement of liver causes abdominal enlargement and also other intra-abdominal 
organs inflammation, tumor masses and presence of ascites may also cause abdominal 
enlargement
Vomiting NSAIDs and steroid-induced gastric ulceration will cause vomiting
Diarrhea Gastrointestinal symptoms are common in liver cirrhosis
Delayed small bowel transit in cirrhosis may lead to the development of small bacterial 
overgrowth, which could contribute to the symptoms of abdominal pain and diarrhea
The structural effects of liver cirrhosis on the GI tract have been considered to be mainly 
associated with portal hypertension
Weight loss Hepatobiliary disease will usually have a reduced appetite, and in acute liver disease, animal 
becomes highly catabolic with marked increases in energy expenditure. Significant alterations 
in metabolism lead to accelerated catabolism which shifts to muscle protein and adipose tissue 
utilization for energy subsequently cause weight loss
Hepatic encephalopathy Most commonly seen in animals with acquired/congenital portosystemic shunts (PSSs) and portal 
hypertension
Skin lesion Canine hepatocutaneous syndrome (HCS) is an uncommon metabolic condition associated with 
a unique hepatopathy. It is the most common cause of superficial necrolytic dermatitis (SND) in 
dogs, a syndrome of crusting and erythematous (Fig. 4) lesion in foot
Hoffmann et al. (2006), Maddison et al. (2015), Elhiblu et al. (2015), Bexfield (2017), Webster et al. (2019).

382 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
et al., 2003 ) and ascites in dogs ( Pradhan et al., 2008 ). 
Washabau (2010)  observed severe leucocytosis and neu -
trophilia in dogs with granulomatous hepatitis, hepatic 
cirrhosis, hepatic abscess and hepatic neoplasia. Liver 
being the prime organ is involved in the production of 
erythropoietin and other factors required for erythro -
poiesis and so the dysfunction of liver leads to anemia 
(Sharma et al., 2001 ).
4.6.2 Serum biochemistry
Estimation of liver enzymes like alkaline phospha -
tase (ALP), alanine aminotransferase (ALT), alanine 
 aminotransaminase (AST) and γ-glutamyl transferase 
(GGT) helps to determine the liver diseases (Breton, 2012). 
In addition to the estimation of serum bile acids (sBA), 
urea,  creatinine, glucose, total serum protein (TP), albumin, 
FIG.  1 Dog yellowish discoloration of oral mucosa (Jaundice) due to 
hepatobiliary disorders.
FIG. 2 Dog blue eye due to canine adenovirus type 1.
 FIG. 4 Dog crusting, erythematous lesion on foot pads due to hepatocu-
taneous syndrome.
FIG. 3 Dog severely distended abdomen due to ascites of hepatobiliary 
disorders.

Diseases of hepatobiliary system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 25  383
serum ammonia (NH3), prothrombin time (PT), activated 
partial thromboplastin time (APTT), fibrinogen will facili -
tate the assessment of hepatic damage in dogs ( Poldervaart 
et  al., 2009; Alvarez and Whittemore, 2009a,b ). Elevated 
liver enzymes are not always reliable indicator of liver 
diseases. Hence, liver biopsies (in dogs) or fine-needle as -
pirates (in cats) are essential for the diagnosis, initiate ap -
propriate treatment protocol and provide prognosis about 
the hepatobiliary disorders (Hoffmann, 2010).
Biliary obstruction (Cholestasis) causes bile flow disor-
ders into the intestine which leads to vitamin K deficiency, 
and it directly reflected by prolonged prothrombin time 
(Rothuizen et al., 2007). Similarly, hepatic cirrhosis causes 
hypoproteinemia and inadequate synthesis of clotting fac -
tors. Elevated prothrombin time (PT) and partial thrombo -
plastin time (PTT) are seen when there is more than a 75% 
reduction in functional hepatic mass (Center, 1996).
Hyperbilirubinemia and hypoalbuminemia are the 
common chronic hepatitis and decreased concentrations 
of blood urea nitrogen and cholesterol developed due to 
liver cirrhosis in dogs ( Webster et al., 2019 ). Albumin is 
synthesized by liver, greater than 60% hypoalbuminemia 
has been associated with hepatic dysfunction, and also it 
should be differentiated with other disorders, viz. kidney, 
gastrointestinal and circulatory sequestration and dilution 
(Hoffmann, 2010). Increased ALP, γ-glutamyl transferase, 
ALT, and total bilirubin were observed in gallbladder mu -
coceles (Choi et al., 2014).
Estimation of serum bile acid and ammonia is the 
most sensitive for the assessment of hepatic function, and 
it significantly increased with portosystemic shunting and 
cirrhosis ( Center, 1996; Gerritzen-Bruning et  al., 2006 ). 
Portosystemic shunting and severe hepatic dysfunction 
cause elevated ammonia in dogs. Because the liver was un-
able to synthesize sufficient glutamine or urea, which leads 
ammonia freely passes across membranes and blood-brain 
barrier. The major clinical signs observed with hyperam -
monemia are hepatic encephalopathy (Center et al., 1991).
Reduction in the level of total protein and albumin 
level in the ascitic dogs could be due to the primary role 
of liver in the synthesis of major plasma protein as well as 
site of degradation and synthesis of many other proteins, 
which has been influenced by liver diseases in many ways 
(Table 5) (Webster, 2005).
Significance of lab profile
● Significant increased level of ALT and AST with normal 
creatinine kinase is suggesting hepatocellular damage.
● Elevated AST level returning to the normal range could 
be a good indicator of prognosis, especially in animals 
with acute liver toxicity.
● In acute fulminant hepatitis, increased AST activities 
will be observed due to severe hepatocellular injury.
● GGT in relationship to ALP, ALP may be higher than 
GGT activities in hepatic lipidosis.
● In dogs, GGT is more specific for liver disease than 
ALP, but it has less sensitivity.
● In cats, GGT is more sensitive but less specific than ALP 
for hepatobiliary disease.
● Decreased serum albumin, cholesterol, blood urea ni -
trogen and hyperbilirubinemia may have reflected in 
hepatic insufficiency and also in end-stage cirrhotic 
change.
● Elevated total serum bilirubin concentration has been 
identified as a negative prognostic indicator.
● Elevated alkaline phosphatase and gamma-glutamyl 
transpeptidase are consistent with cholestasis.
● Increased bile acid and alkaline phosphatase good indi -
cator for cholangiohepatitis.
● Low bile acid and increased alkaline phosphatase sug -
gestive of steroid-induced hepatopathy.
● Elevated serum ALT, ALP, GGT, bile acids and biliru -
bin levels are most suggested indicator of hepatobiliary 
disorders.
4.6.3 Coagulation profile
Evaluation of coagulation status is very essential in hepatic 
disorders especially in chronic hepatitis. The coagulation 
disorders were also noticed in platelet defects, vitamin K 
deficiency and disseminated intravascular coagulation. The 
tests performed to detect coagulation disorder are buccal 
mucosal bleeding time, platelet count, prothrombin time, 
activated partial prothrombin time, fibrinogen, D dimer 
and thromboelastography ( Lawrence and Steiner, 2015 ). 
Estimation of coagulation profile is essential before per -
forming FNAC and liver biopsy.
4.6.4 Microbial culture
Bile samples can be obtained with percutaneous ultrasound-
guided cholecystocentesis to assess for inflammation, in -
fectious agents, and culture and susceptibility ( Harrison 
et  al., 2018). Common bacterial isolates of bile fluid by 
percutaneous USG guided, which include Escherichia coli, 
Enterococcus spp., Klebsiella spp., Clostridium spp. and 
Bacteroides spp. (Rivers et al., 1997; Tamborini et al., 2016; 
Harrison et al., 2018).
4.6.5 Serum ascites albumin gradient
Serum ascites albumin gradient (SAAG) is being used to 
classify ascites as high-gradient and low-gradient asci -
tes (Runyon et al., 1992 ; Pembleton-Corbett et al., 2000 ). 
SAAG is calculated by subtracting the albumin concentra -
tion of the ascitic fluid from the albumin concentration of 
a serum specimen obtained on the same day. When the dif-
ference between serum albumin and ascitic fluid albumin is

384 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
more than 1.1 g/dL, it is considered as high-gradient ascites, 
whereas the difference is less than 1.1  g/dL, it is termed as 
low-gradient ascites ( Alleman, 2003 ; Tarn and Lapworth, 
2010). If SAAG is more than 1.1  g/dL have portal hyper -
tension and less than 1.1  g/dL said to be an unrelated to 
portal hypertension. Previously in human medicine SAAG 
has been well established for the diagnosis of ascites due 
to hepatopathy ( Beg et  al., 2001). Similarly, in dogs also 
SAAG provides to differentiate ascites of chronic liver dis-
eases from other organ dysfunction especially cardiovascu-
lar dysfunction (Saravanan et al., 2012, 2014a).
4.6.6 Urinalysis
Routine urinalysis in dogs and cats will help and differenti-
ate diseases like kidney insufficiency, ketosis, diabetes and 
also liver abnormalities. In the hepatobiliary disorders, low-
urine low-specific gravity ( <1.025) is common in chronic 
liver disease and congenital portosystemic shunt ( Parrah 
et al., 2013 ). Even though the presence of bilirubinuria is 
nonspecific in dogs, but a specific indicator of liver disease 
in cats ( Yadav et al., 2020 ). Urate and ammonium biurate 
crystals observed with hepatic disease especially in con -
genital PSS (Bexfield, 2015).
4.6.7 Diagnostic imaging
Abdominal ultrasound examination
Abdominal ultrasound examination is very much useful in 
the diagnosis hepatic and gallbladder diseases. USG along 
with hemobiochemical alterations may be used as a diag -
nostic tool for liver cirrhosis in dogs ( Elhiblu et al., 2015), 
and it is useful for identifying focal and diffuse liver disease 
or biliary disease (Fig. 5) (Gaschen, 2009; Hoffmann, 2010; 
Mahendran et al., 2017).
For ultrasonographic examination of liver, transducer 
should be placed immediately behind the xiphisternum on 
the midline and angled cranio-dorsally to image a  transverse 
TABLE 5 Serum biochemical changes of hepatobiliary disorders in dogs and cats.
Parameters/reference range Sources of enzyme Increased level
Alkaline phosphatase (ALP)
Adult dog: up to 110 U/L
Adult cat: up to 140 U/L
Puppies/kittens: up to 6 times  
elevated
• Biliary tract
• Half-life is approximately 70 h in dogs 
and 6 h in cats
• Cholestasis
• Young growing animals
• Severe active bone lesions
• Corticosteroid and phenobarbital administration
Alanine aminotransferase (ALT)
Dog: up to 55 U/L
Cat: up to 70 U/L
• Hepatocyte
• Liver-specific
• Half-life of approximately 2.5 days in 
dogs and several hours in cats
• Hepatocellular damage
• Corticosteroids and anticonvulsant drugs
Aspartate aminotransferase (AST)
Dog: up to 25 U/L
Cat: up to 30 U/L
• Hepatocellular enzyme
• Half-life 12 h in dogs and 2 h in cats
• Not liver specific; also released in 
patients with skeletal muscle damage
• Skeletal muscle damage
• Hepatocellular necrosis
Gamma-glutamyl transferase (GGT)
Dog: up to 25 U/L
Cat: up to 30 U/L
• Intestine, pancreas, liver, and kidneys
• A membrane-bound enzyme located 
distally in the biliary tree
• Cholestasis
• Corticosteroid administration
Bile acid
Dog: up to 20 μmol/L
(12 h fasting value)
Cat: up to 20 μmol/L
(12 h fasting value)
• Bile acids are synthesized from 
cholesterol
• Congenital and acquired hepatic shunt
• Bile duct obstruction
• Cholangiohepatitis
• Cirrhosis
Bilirubin
Dog: up to 0–2 mg/dL (3–4 μmol/L)
Cat: up to 0–2 mg/dL (3–4 μmol/L)
• Bilirubin is derived from the 
catabolism of hemoglobin
• Sensitive indicators of hepatobiliary disease
• Conjugated bilirubin indicated in liver diseases
• Unconjugated bilirubin indicated in hemolysis
Ammonia
Up to 100 μg/dL
• Protein metabolism • Congenital and acquired
• Bile duct obstruction
• Cholangiohepatitis
• Cirrhosis
• Hepatoencephalopathy
Center (1996), Alvarez and Whittemore (2009a,b), Gomez Selgas et al. (2014), Bexfield (2015), Lawrence and Steiner (2015), McAtee and Lidbury (2017).

Diseases of hepatobiliary system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 25  385
section of liver. Gradually transducer moved caudally, re -
main on the midline and transducer head rotated through 90 
degrees to image a longitudinal section of liver on midline. 
For right transverse oblique screen of the gall bladder, trans-
ducer placed on the right side approximately 6–8 cm cranial 
to xiphoid and 4–5 cm dorsal to the sternum. The transducer 
angled toward midline between costal cartilages. For left 
transverse oblique scan of the gall bladder, the transducer 
should be placed on right 10th–11th intercostal space, 
5–10 cm ventral to the spine (Nyland and Mattoon, 2002).
The ultrasound probe and frequency for the examination 
of hepatobiliary system are 5 MHZ Convex probe (for larger 
dog) and 7.5  MHZ Micro convex/linear probe (for smaller 
dogs). The ultrasound feature of various  hepatobiliary 
 disorder is given in Table 6. The following points to be fol-
lowed during ultrasound evaluation of liver and gall bladder 
of dogs and cats; (a) volume or size (enlarged or small), 
FIG. 5 USG dog liver and spleen—hypoechoic appearance of the liver 
relative to the spleen in a normal dog.
TABLE 6 Ultrasonographic findings of hepatobiliary disorders in dogs and cats.
Condition Ultrasound finings
Normal liver Normal liver: (a) Hypoechoic liver parenchyma relative to the spleen. (b) The normal liver has a 
homogenous echogenicity and slightly hyperechoic to the renal cortex and normal liver lobes have sharp 
edges. The gallbladder is normally found to the right of midline surrounded by the hepatic parenchyma 
(Fig. 6) (Bexfield, 2015)
Hepatic congestion The diffuse hypoechoic liver parenchyma, rounded margins with hepatomegaly (Fig. 7) mainly noticed 
in right-side heart failure. In hepatic congestion, distended portal vein will be observed (Gaschen, 2009)
Hepatitis/hepatomegaly The caudal tip of liver margin is usually rounded with hepatomegaly. Focal (Fig. 8) and diffuse (Fig. 9) 
hepatic lesions were suggestive of chronic hepatitis
Fatty liver Small multiple hyperechoic nodules in the liver (Fig. 10). Increased liver echogenicity compared adjoin 
organs
Ascites Anechoic fluid in the abdominal cavity (Fig. 11). Separation of the liver lobes is apparent, due to free 
fluid within the peritoneal cavity and floating of abdominal organs within it (Saravanan et al., 2014b)
Cirrhosis Diffuse hyperechogenicity, irregularity of liver margins (Fig. 12) and microhepatica were the consistent 
findings (Elhiblu et al., 2015)
Tumor Irregularity of liver margins with increased echogenic may be focal and diffused
Hepatic cyst Anechoic thin-walled structure with in the liver parenchyma (Fig. 13)
Abscess/hematoma Abscesses may appear as round or irregular with a hypoechoic center or mixed echogenicity
Portosystemic shunt Small liver, reduced visibility of intrahepatic portal vessels and uneven blood vessel draining into the 
caudal vena cava. A tortuous shunting vessel arises from the portal vein (PV), which is connected to 
caudal vena cava (CVC)
Gallbladder mucoceles Gallbladder looks like kiwi fruit-like pattern, and intraluminal hyperechoic immobile striation biliary 
sludge filling is suggestive of gallbladder Mucoceles (Choi et al., 2014; Uno et al., 2009)
Extrahepatic biliary 
obstruction
Gallbladder enlargement, dilation of the cystic and/or bile ducts (Besso et al., 2000; Center, 2009)
Cholecystitis
Cholangiohepatitis
Thickened, hyperechoic, irregular and/or laminar gallbladder wall; echogenic intraluminal contents; 
pericholecystic fluid, distended bile duct (Fig. 9) and heterogeneous or hyperechoic hepatic parenchyma 
(Harrison et al., 2018; Tamborini et al., 2016)

386 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
FIG. 6 USG dog liver and GB—long-axis right-sided image of the liver 
and gallbladder in a normal dog.
FIG.  9 USG dog liver—diffusely hypoechoic parenchyma and hyper -
echoic wall of the portal veins in Cholangiohepatitis.
FIG.  7 USG dog portal vein and liver—enlarged liver with distended 
hepatic veins and vena cava—hepatic congestion due to right side heart 
failure.
 FIG.  10 USG dog liver—small multiple hyperechoic nodules in fatty 
liver.
FIG. 8 USG dog liver—heterogeneous liver parenchyma with Focal hy-
poechogenic liver lobe.
FIG. 11 USG dog liver—hyperechogenic liver parenchyma with irregu-
lar margin and ascites in Liver cirrhosis.

Diseases of hepatobiliary system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 25  387
(b) margins/borders (smooth versus irregular), (c) overall 
echogenicity of the hepatic parenchyma, (d) appearance 
of the portal and hepatic veins, and (e) distribution of any 
abnormalities (focal, multifocal, or generalized) ( Mauragis 
and Berry, 2016).
Radiography
Appreciable abdominal distension observed in dogs and 
cats should be first checked with abdominal survey radi -
ography to ruled out organomegaly, effusion and tumor/
mass. Abdominal radiography could diagnose the pres -
ence of hepatomegaly ( Fig. 14), small-sized liver, irregu -
lar liver margin, mass and tumor in the liver. Increased 
echogenic liver could be suggestive of chronic hepatitis, 
cirrhosis and tumor mass. Decreases in the abdominal 
details and ground glass appeared abdomen could be as -
sociated with abdominal effusion. Abdominal survey ra -
diography can diagnose alteration in the size and  contours 
of liver, but it could not diagnose changes in liver pa -
renchymal structure ( Bexfield and Watson, 2006, 2009 ; 
Gaschen, 2009 ).
Other imaging modalities
Other advanced imaging modalities like scintigraphy, 
magnetic resonance imaging and computed tomography 
are used in referral centers only because of the cost-
effective. Scintigraphy can be used in the diagnosis of 
portosystemic shunts, but by this method able to differ -
entiate between acquired and congenital hepatic shunts. 
Computed tomographic examination of the liver of dogs 
and cats has been used for diagnosis of hepatic shunts 
and vascular abnormalities ( Bexfield and Watson, 2006 ; 
Gaschen, 2009 ).
4.6.8 Abdominocentesis
Abdominocentesis is performed for diagnostic and thera -
peutic purpose. Diagnostic paracentesis could assist in 
timely identifying the pathological causes which are respon-
sible for the fluid accumulation or it can help for further 
investigative procedures which may be helpful in diagnos -
ing the diseases condition ( Papasouliotis and Dewhurst, 
2005). It can be done in patient on standing position or in 
left lateral recumbency with aseptic method. A site should 
be chosen 2–3  cm caudal to the umbilicus and 2–3  cm left 
of the midline for sampling. The bladder should be emp -
tied before abdominal paracentesis. A 22 or 20 G needle or 
catheter has been inserted at an angle of 45 degrees to the 
body wall. Fluid was collected directly into the sterile vials 
with or without EDTA for further analysis (Alleman, 2003; 
Rudolff, 2005).
Therapeutic abdominocentesis is very much needed in 
severe ascites or refractory ascitic condition to impair mobil-
ity and to reduce respiratory compromise (Trepanier, 2008; 
Bexfield and Watson, 2009 ). Abdominal  paracentesis has 
FIG.  12 USG dog liver and GB—hyperechogenic liver parenchyma 
thickened gall bladder surrounded with ascites in cirrhosis and cholecys -
titis in dog.
FIG. 13 USG dog liver—multiple anechoic area right hepatic lobe and 
diffuse heterogeneous enlargement of the liver in multiple hepatic cyst.
FIG. 14 Radiography dog abdomen lateral—hepatomegaly.

388 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
been considered to be a sensitive technique for  collecting 
fluid more than 6  mL/kg body weight ( Fig. 15) (Ford and 
Mazzaferro, 2006).
Ascitic fluid analysis
The variation in the total protein concentration of the ascitic 
fluid in the patients with chronic liver could be a difference 
in serum protein concentration and in portal pressure and to 
be relatively independent of peritoneal permeability (Hoefs, 
1983). Blood-stained fluid usually due to traumatic tap, 
peritoneal carcinoma and ascitic fluids which remain ho -
mogeneously blood-stained fluid throughout the tap could 
indicate malignancy, pancreatitis, intestinal infarction and 
tuberculosis (Runyon et al., 1988; Alleman, 2003).
Runyon et  al. (1988) reported that the nonbiochemical 
tests (cell count, bacterial culture) and cytology of ascitic 
fluid had an important role in the evaluation of ascitic fluid. 
Chylons effusion could be easily recognized by their color 
(opaque) and confirmed by triglyceride concentration greater 
than 100 mg/dL in ascitic fluid (Alleman, 2003). Gupta et al. 
(1995) reported that the total protein (TP) of ascitic fluid was 
less than 25 g/L had a 100% diagnostic specificity, positive 
predictive value for a cirrhotic effusion whereas body weight 
sensitivity was less good at 76%, and the overall diagnostic 
accuracy was calculated at 88% (compared with 92% for se-
rum ascitic fluid albumin gradient of 11 g/dL).
The gross appearance of the ascitic fluid provides useful 
diagnostic information about the ascites and a clear straw 
colored ascitic fluid noticed in cirrhotic patient. Pembleton-
Corbett et al. (2000) suggested that portal hypertension is a 
predominant force in formation of transudative abdominal 
effusion in dogs with hepatobiliary disease and in dogs with 
other disorders. Basic tests are ascitic fluid analysis protein 
determination, total nucleated cell count (TNCC) and cytol-
ogy. Ascites due to liver disease is typically a pure transudate 
with total protein concentration of less than 2.5  g/dL and 
specific gravity between 1.010 and 1.015. Cytologically, the 
fluid had low cellularity with only a few mesothelial cells 
and neutrophils (Center, 2006).
4.6.9 Modified prognosis score for the ascites 
of hepatobiliary disorders in dogs
In human patient, various scoring systems are being used to 
assess the severity of disease and to determine the prognosis 
in patients with liver cirrhosis and its potential complications 
which include variceal gastrointestinal bleeding, coagulopa-
thy, ascites, hepatic encephalopathy and hepatocellular car-
cinoma. Strategies have been established to prevent some of 
these complications or to detect them at an early stage (Riley 
and Bhatti, 2001 ). In addition to the simple estimation of 
life expectancy, more complex issues must be taken into ac-
count, such as the capacity of a cirrhotic patient to withstand 
a given therapeutic intervention, or whether a given thera -
peutic option offers an acceptable chance of survival or not 
(Durand and Valla, 2008). But there were no such kind of 
scoring system available in  veterinary practices for ascites 
due to hepatobiliary disorders in dogs.
Saravanan (2012) was undertaken to develop a prognos-
tic score as a pilot study for ascites due to hepatopathies in 
dogs based on modified Child-Pugh score. Clinical mark -
ers such as serum bilirubin, serum albumin, prothrombin 
time, degree of encephalopathy and the presence of ascites 
parameter were modified for ascitic dogs, and prognosis of 
the animals was recorded (Table 7).
The scoring system allows for classifying the disease as 
5–6 which is considered Grade A (well-compensated dis -
ease) 7–9 as Grade B (significant functional compromise) 
and 10–15 as Grade C (decompensate disease). During his 
TABLE 7 Modified Child-Pugh score for ascites of 
hepatobiliary disorders in dogs.
Parameters
Score
1 2 3
Total bilirubin (mg/dL) <0.5 0.5–1.0 >1.0
Serum albumin (g/dL) >3.0 2.5–3.0 <2.5
Prothrombin time (PT) 
in seconds
<6.0 6–10 >10
Ascites None Mild Severe
Hepatic 
encephalopathy
None Suppressed 
with 
medication
Refractory
Total score    
FIG. 15 Dog abdominal paracentesis—left lateral.

Diseases of hepatobiliary system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 25  389
study, mean value of modified prognosis score for ascitic 
dogs was 9.79 ± 0.19. In this present study, 42 (58.3%) and 
30 dogs (41.7%) showed moderate and severe form of ascites 
respectively. Diagnosis was done based upon clinical signs 
(abdominal distension and respiratory dyspnea) and USG 
examination. Severe form of ascites might be due to liver 
cirrhosis with recurrence of ascites, and he reported most of 
the dogs were found to have refractory ascites. Moreover, 
ascites formation depends on the balance  between the local 
transvascular filtration and lymph drainage (Henriksen and 
Moller, 2005). Thus, the amount of ascitic fluid production 
was governed by increased transinusoidal filtration of pro -
tein and fluid and by transperitoneal hydrostatic and oncotic 
pressure (Moller et al., 2005).
4.6.10 Biopsy/FNAC
WSA V A Liver Standardization Group (2006) has published 
standards for histological and clinical diagnosis of canine and 
feline liver diseases. Fine-needle aspiration cytology (FNAC) 
is minimally invasive and safe method to diagnose hepatic 
vacuolation and lymphoma, but it has limitation because 
misinterpretation of diseases may occur especially in chronic 
hepatitis, cirrhosis and lymphocytic cholangitis (Hoffmann, 
2010). Hence, liver biopsy is the ideal method for the con -
firmation of hepatobiliary diseases in human as well as in 
animals. Ultrasound-guided liver sampling either FNAC or 
liver biopsy is safe method for the diagnosis of various hepa-
tobiliary diseases in dogs and cats. For obtaining good liver 
biopsy sample, ultrasound-guided automated biopsy gun is 
essential (Bexfield, 2015). Before performing FNAC or bi -
opsy procedure, animal should be with normal coagulation 
profile (Hoffmann, 2010). Full-thickness liver biopsy sample 
could be obtained through laparoscopic method, but it should 
perform under general anesthesia. Even though limitation in 
the laparoscopic biopsy, gross view of liver and associated 
structure and sampling from accurate lesion area is possible.
5 Treatment and management
Successful management of hepatobiliary disorders depends 
on identifying root causes. Antibiotic treatment is indicated 
for active hepatic or biliary infection based on culture of 
bile or liver biopsy. Whenever treating the hepatobiliary dis-
orders, always treat secondary and extrahepatic causes, like 
septicemia, GI neoplasia or inflammatory bowel disease. 
Cholecystectomy is generally recommended over medical 
management of gallbladder mucoceles. If surgical manage-
ment is not opted, medical therapy with ursodeoxycholic 
acid, low-fat diet and antibiotics could help to prolong the 
life of the patient ( Besso et  al., 2000 ; Choi et  al., 2014 ; 
Parkanzky et al., 2019). Depending on the cause and sever-
ity of biliary disease, one must determine if urgent surgical 
care or conservative medical management is warranted. For 
the cholangiohepatitis and/or cholecystitis, cholecystec -
tomy can reduce morbidity and mortality in dogs. Medical 
management for this condition is with antibiotics (amoxicil-
lin/clavulanic acid and enrofloxacin), ursodeoxycholic acid 
and supportive care (Rivers et al., 1997; Center, 2009).
Selection of the most appropriate fluid for patients with 
hepatobiliary disease must be taken into consideration in asci-
tes, hypoalbuminemia, hyponatremia, hypokalemia, coagulop-
athies, and hyperlactatemia and whether preexisting acid-base 
disturbances put them at risk for HE ( Center, 2006; Kumar 
et al., 2013; Saravanan et al., 2013; Vijayakumar et al., 2013).
5.1 Treatment for ascites
● Therapeutic paracentesis should only be performed if 
the ascites is life threatening and concurrent plasma or 
albumin transfusion should be given if large-volume 
therapeutic paracentesis is performed.
● Frusemide (@ 1–2  mg/kg po, sc, iv every 8–12  h), it 
should use in combination with spironolactone and 
monitor for hypokalemia.
● Spironolactone (@ 2–4 mg/kg po every 24 h), an aldo -
sterone antagonist, it is diuretic of ascitic patients with 
portal hypertension and gradual onset of action over 
2–3 days (Bexfield, 2014).
5.2 Management of hepatic encephalopathy
● Oral administration of antibiotics (Ampicillin, amoxicil-
lin @ 10–25 mg/kg po, Metronidazole @ 7.5 mg/kg po ) 
reduces protein breakdown in the gut, and fermentable 
fiber (Lactulose @ 5–20  mL po every 8–12  h) dimin -
ishes the production, absorption of ammonia and speeds 
up gut transit (Bexfield and Watson, 2009).
● Protein restriction could help to reduce ammonia 
 absorption from the colon.
5.3 Drug induced toxicity
● Activated charcoal @ 2–5 g/kg orally
● N-acetylcysteine is the commonly used antidote for the 
paracetamol toxicity. N-acetylcysteine @ 140 mg/kg IV 
loading dose followed by @ 70  mg/kg IV every 6  h for 
six to seven administrations.
● Vitamin C @ 30 mg/kg PO or SQ every 6 h
● Cimetidine @ 5–10 mg/kg every 6–8 h IV , IM
● S-adenosyl methionine @ 18  mg/kg PO SID on an 
empty stomach
5.4 Other medications
● Sucralfate administrated (@ 1  g per 20  kg every 6–8  h) 
to protect gastrointestinal ulceration induced by drugs 
induced toxicity.

390 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
● H2 blockers (Ranitidine @ 2  mg/kg po, sc or slow iv 
every 12 h) and proton pump inhibitors (Pantoprazole @ 
1 mg/kg IV) to for gastroduodenal ulcer.
● Steroid treatment in dogs with chronic liver disease 
(Bexfield and Watson, 2009)
○ Steroids should be used in animals with (a) there is 
biopsy evidence of ongoing inflammation, (b) there 
is no fibrosis or only early, mild fibrosis associated 
with an inflammatory infiltrate, (c) infectious causes 
have been ruled out as far as possible.
○ Steroids should NOT be used in animals with  
(a) Known or suspected infectious conditions, includ-
ing ascending biliary tract infection, (b) Advanced, 
bridging fibrosis or noninflammatory fibrosis. There 
is no evidence that steroids slow progression and 
there is a high risk of serious adverse effects due to 
associated portal hypertension, (c) Ascites, which, in 
animals with liver disease, is mainly caused by por -
tal hypertension. The use of corticosteroids in cases 
of portal hypertension may precipitate gastrointes -
tinal ulceration, which, in turn, precipitates hepatic 
encephalopathy as a result of bleeding into the in -
testinal lumen. Steroids also further increase water 
retention, (d) Hepatic encephalopathy, in which the 
use of corticosteroids leads to protein catabolism 
and the production of ammonia and other encepha -
lopathic compounds, (e) Acute hepatitis animals 
usually have infectious disease or toxicity and carry 
a high risk of gastrointestinal ulceration. Steroids 
should be avoided unless there is a specific and defi-
nite indication.
● Corticosteroids @ 2.2  mg/kg for 7–14  days, they re -
sulted in a significant increase in survival time in canine 
chronic hepatitis (Strombeck et al., 1998).
● Idiopathic chronic inflammatory liver disease is often 
treated with antiinflammatory therapy (prednisolone, 
1–2 mg/kg/day tapered eventually to a dose of 0.5  g/kg/
day or every other day and/or azathioprine, 0.5  mg/kg/
day) when suspected immune mediated mechanisms are 
involved in chronic hepatitis.
● Other accepted pharmacologic agents include col -
chicine for hepatic fibrosis and ursodeoxycholic 
acid to protect against the toxic effects of bile acids 
(Lawrence and Steiner, 2015 ). The benefit of colchi -
cine (0.03  mg/kg/day) in liver disease in small ani -
mals. Used in cases of moderate to marked fibrosis 
that have been confirmed by biopsy. Monitor animals 
for bone marrow suppression and gastrointestinal side 
effects are common.
● Ursodeoxycholic acid is a bile acid modifier, antioxi -
dant, choleretic immunomodulatory and antiinflamma -
tory. It is a hydrophilic bile acid that displaces toxic 
hydrophobic bile acids and stimulates bile flow. Dose 
@ 10–15  mg/kg total orally daily preferably divided 
into two doses and given with food to increase bioavail-
ability. It is potentially indicated in most cases of liver 
disease, particularly if there is associated biliary stasis. 
However, it should be avoided in dogs with complete 
biliary obstruction because of its potential to cause gall 
bladder rupture (Webster et al., 2019).
● S-adenosyl methionine (@ 20  mg/kg PO once a day on 
an empty stomach; phytate salt: 8–10 mg/kg once a day). 
It increases intracellular cysteine leading to increased 
hepatic glutathione synthesis, increases methylation of 
phospholipids and DNA which promotes membrane 
stability and controls production of inflammatory cyto -
kines (Webster et al., 2019).
● Silymarin (milk thistle) is a potent antioxidant, anti -
inflammatory, antifibrotic and choleretic. Use dose @ 
50–200 mg/dog orally every 24 h.
● Penicillamine is the most readily available copper che -
lator against copper storage diseases in dogs @ 15  mg/
kg bid.
● Parenteral amino acids administration helps in the speed 
recovery from the hepatic insufficiency.
● Vitamin K @ 0.5–1.5  mg/kg, repeated three times at 
12-h intervals, has been clinically shown to ameliorate 
coagulation abnormalities liver disease.
5.5 Nutritional management
● Highly digestible, high-quality protein (cottage cheese, 
chicken, or soya) diet supplement should be fed to the 
hepatic insufficiency pets. Protein supplementation 
should monitor in hepatic encephalopathy and peri -
odical monitoring of serum albumin concentrations is 
essential during protein diet supplement in hepatic dys -
function (Bexfield and Watson, 2009).
● Protein intake should be restricted only in the presence 
of hyperammonemia, ammonium biurate crystalluria, or 
animals with hepatic encephalopathy.
● Sodium intake should be limited to 100 mg/100 kcal en-
ergy requirement in hypoalbuminemia dogs and cats in 
ascites animal.
6 Conclusion
Diagnosis and management of hepatobiliary disorders is a 
challenge to the pet practitioners; hence, the comprehensive 
approach is very much needed for the early diagnosis and 
initiating appropriate therapeutic protocol to manage hepa -
tobiliary disorders in dogs and cats.
● If the dogs and cats presented with poor treatment re -
sponse to inappetence followed by anorexia, clinician 
should check liver enzymes and abdominal ultrasound 
examination.

Diseases of hepatobiliary system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 25  391
● Chronic and intermittent tick and tick born infected pets 
should be periodically evaluate for liver function and 
abdominal ultrasound examination. Similarly, pets re -
ceiving drugs like steroids, antiepileptic and antifungal 
should be evaluated periodically.
● Those dogs and cats detected with any organ disorders 
must be checked for liver problem also.
● Package of practice should be followed to manage the 
hepatobiliary disorders.
Acknowledgment
The authors are grateful to Dr. D.B. Mondal, Principal Scientist, 
Division of Medicine, IVRI, Izatnagar, the Associate Professor and 
Head, Veterinary Clinical Complex, VCRI, Orathanadu, the Director 
of Clinics TANUV AS, and the Dean, VCRI, Orathanadu.

392 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Diseases of hepatobiliary system of dogs and cats   Chapter | 25  393

395

Chapter 26
Common toxicological phenomenon in 
dogs and cats
Paracelsus (1493–1541) statement: “All substances are poi-
son; there is none which is not a poison. The right dose dif-
ferentiates a poison from a remedy”
Toxicology is the study of poisons and their effects on living 
organisms and the environment. It is a multidisciplinary sci-
ence based on the cardinal principle, i.e., dose and response. 
The incidence of poisoning in animals is relatively low com-
pared to infectious, metabolic diseases, allergies, trauma, 
neoplasia, etc. (Peterson and Talcott, 2006; Klassen, 2019).
The most common companion animals are dogs ( Canis 
familiaris) and cats ( Felis silvestris catus). Dogs were do -
mesticated approximately 15,000  years ago and cats ap -
proximately 10,000 years ago. Dogs were used for hunting 
and guarding, and cats as predators of rodents. Globally, 471 
million dogs and about 370 million cats are kept as pets. 
The population of pet cats in India amounted to nearly 2 mil-
lion in the year 2018 and is predicted to reach approximately 
2.5 million by the end of the year 2023. The population of pet 
dogs in India accounted for around 19.5 million in the year 
2018 and is predicted to reach over 31 million by the end of 
the year 2023 (Cote and Khan, 2005; Driscoll et al., 2009). 
Toxicity in dogs and cats is due to accidental exposure, ma-
licious poisoning, therapeutic error, and secondary poison -
ing. The toxicants are either natural or man-made sources. 
Natural toxicants are plants, zootoxins (snakes, bees, wasps, 
ticks, scorpions, spiders, fish, and toads), microorganisms 
(mycotoxins, botulinum toxin), and minerals (lead, arsenic, 
fluoride, selenium, iron, copper, etc.). Most of the natural 
toxicants enter the body through the food chain. Man-made 
sources are pesticides, household products, drugs, food ad -
ditives, etc. The most common routes of toxicant exposure 
are the oral and dermal routes ( Alwood, 2009; American 
Association of Poison Control Centers, 2011; Koyasu et al., 
2020; Peterson and Talcott, 2006).
Unlike dogs, cats have  discriminating habits and appe -
tites, making them less likely to ingest things that are not 
good for them. But due to their grooming habits, cats are 
more at risk than dogs from toxicants that come into contact 
with their fur. Almost 95% of animal exposures to poisons 
are oral, only about 4% are dermal, and less than 2% are via 
other routes (Jason et al., 2014; Jull et al., 2011).
The features such as factors related to a toxicant, ex -
posure conditions, the subject, and environmental condi -
tions alter an animal’s response to toxicants. Dog breeds 
like collies and Australian shepherds are very susceptible 
to the anthelmintic ivermectin and the antidiarrheal lop -
eramide. Cats are highly susceptible to phenol poison -
ing. Greyhounds are most vulnerable to thiobarbiturates 
(Freedman and Wayne, 2017; Gwaltney-Brant, 2007; 
Vigne et al., 2004; Klassen, 2019).
Successful diagnosis of a definite poisoning is based on 
a complete history, circumstantial evidence, clinical signs, 
pathological evidence, analytical evidence, experimental 
evidence, and response to treatment. The complete history 
includes health history, diet, onset of action and clinical 
signs observed by the owner. The circumstantial evidence 
include housing and its management, food and water stor -
age, atmospheric pollution, poisonous plants, and animals 
around the vicinity of the house. The final diagnosis is a col-
lective outcome of all the evidence. Veterinarians must never 
suggest patient owners that an animal has been poisoned un-
less there is adequate evidence to support such a conclusion 
(American Veterinary Medical Association (A VMA), 2007; 
Babcock and Neihsl, 2006; Beasley et  al., 1999; Brown 
et al., 2007; Osweiler, 1996; Osweiler et al., 1985; Plumb, 
2011; Poppenga Robert, 2002; Puschner et al., 2007).
Treatment should be initiated at the earliest to maintain 
the vital functions. A few toxicants have specific antidotes. 
These antidotes counteract poisons either by receptor an -
tagonism or by chelation. The symptomatic and supportive 
care is imperative for the survival of the animal in poisoning 
which lacks a specific antidote ( Klassen, 2019; Liu et al., 
2008; Lubich and Mrvos, 2004; Rosedale, 2002).

396 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
1 Acetaminophen
Acetaminophen [ N-(4-hydroxyphenyl) acetamide] or 
paracetamol is an analgesic, antipyretic, and poor antiin -
flammatory drug. The single toxic dose of acetaminophen 
range from 50–100 mg/kg (cats) to 600 mg/kg (dogs). N- 
acetyl-para-benzoquinoneimine (NAPQI) is a toxic me -
tabolite of paracetamol which induces toxicity. In dogs, the 
liver is more susceptible, and in cats, the red blood cells 
are more sensitive to oxidative injury by N-acetyl-para- 
benzoquinoneimine due to glutathione depletion. The clini-
cal signs in dogs are anorexia, vomition, abdominal pain, 
icterus, lethargy, trembling, chemosis, tachycardia, tachy -
pnoea, facial, and paw edema. If methemoglobinemia is 
present, cyanosis, hemoglobinuria, and hematuria may also 
be observed. The most common clinical signs in cats include 
cyanosis or brown mucous membranes, methemoglobin -
emia, Heinz body formation, lethargy, anorexia, vomition, 
respiratory distress, edema of the face and paws, hypother -
mia, and icterus. The antidote for paracetamol poisoning in 
both dogs and cats is N-acetylcysteine. It is administered at 
140 mg/kg IV initial dose, followed by 70 mg/kg IV q 4–6 h 
for 7–17 doses. S-adenosyl-methionine (SAMe) 18 mg/kg/
day PO may reduce oxidative damage. Ascorbic acid (vita-
min C) 30 mg/kg PO, SQ, IV q 6 h acts as an antioxidant 
to reduce MetHb to Hb. In addition, symptomatic and sup -
portive therapy (Hinson et al., 2010; McConkey et al., 2009; 
Richardson, 2000; Wallace et al., 2002).
2 Acetone
Acetone is commonly seen in nail polish removers, varnishes, 
glues, and rubber cement. The route of exposure is oral, der-
mal, and inhalation. Clinical signs are nausea,  vomition, de-
pression, ataxia, stupor, and coma. The characteristic acetone 
odor is seen in the exhaled air. Treatment is largely symptom-
atic and supportive care (Klassen, 2019; Peterson and Talcott, 
2006).
3 Amitraz
Amitraz is a formamidine acaricide with activity against 
ticks, mites, and lice. It is effective against all forms of 
worms, i.e., eggs, larvae, and adults. Toxicity is mediated 
via alpha-2 adrenoceptors in the CNS, octopamine recep -
tors, and inhibition of monoamine oxidase enzyme. Clinical 
signs include hypersalivation, mydriasis, lethargy, ataxia, 
bradycardia, vomiting, dyspnoea, somnolence, hypothermia, 
tremors, and seizures. The alpha-2 adrenoceptor antagonist 
yohimbine at a dose of 0.11–0.2 mg/kg IV and atipamezole 
at a dose of 50 µg/kg IM can be used to treat amitraz toxicity. 
In addition, symptomatic and supportive therapy ( Andrade 
and Sakate, 2003; Hellmann et al., 2007; Hugnet et al., 1996; 
Oglesby et al., 2006; Queiroz et al., 2003).
4 Anticoagulant rodenticide
Anticoagulant rodenticides are brodifacoum, bromadiolone, 
chlorophacinone, coumafuryl, difenacoum, difethialone, di-
phenadione (diphacinone), pindone, valone, and warfarin. 
Dogs are intoxicated more commonly than cats or other do-
mestic animals. Secondary poisoning is also seen. Vitamin K is 
required for the activation of clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X.  
These clotting factors are activated by vitamin K via carbox-
ylation. In this carboxylation reaction, vitamin K (reduced 
form) is converted to vitamin K epoxide (oxidized form). 
Vitamin K epoxide is then converted back to vitamin K by 
vitamin K epoxide reductase. All anticoagulant rodenticides 
block vitamin K epoxide reductase enzyme and interfere with 
the regeneration of the active form of vitamin K, thereby in-
hibiting the synthesis of clotting factors II, VII, IX, and X.  
The decrease in coagulation factors causes massive internal 
and external hemorrhages. Onset time is 2–5 days and the af-
fected animal dies due to tissue hypoxia. Intoxicated  animals 
with anticoagulant rodenticide-induced coagulopathy may 
spontaneously bleed from any site. The clinical signs are an-
orexia, weakness, coughing, epistaxis, dyspnoea caused by 
hemorrhage within the lung, acute anaemia, and hemorrhagic 
shock. Treatment includes specific therapy with vitamin K 1 
at the dose of 2.5–5.0 mg/kg PO q 24 h 5 days to 6 weeks 
or divided PO q12 h for first-generation anticoagulant toxi-
cosis. Vitamin K1 administration continued for 3–4  weeks 
with suspected second-generation anticoagulant toxicosis. 
Additionally, blood or plasma transfusions, oxygen therapy, 
antibiotics, and other supportive therapy (Sheafor and Couto, 
1999a,b; Stine and Brown, 2006).
5 Arsenic
Arsenic is a ubiquitous element and is one of the heavy 
metal having toxicological significance. Ingestion of 
 arsenic-containing ant and roach baits is the most common 
exposure in dogs and cats. Clinical signs of acute poisoning 
are vomition, diarrhea, dehydration, colic, trembling, stagger-
ing gait, hypotension, hind limb paralysis, coma, and death. 
Specific treatment with dimercaprol or British  Anti-Lewisite 
(BAL) may be required. In small animals, the dose of BAL 
is 2.5–5 mg/kg IM as a 10% solution in oil. Injections should 
be repeated every 4 h for the first 2 days, every 8 h on the 
third day, and twice a day for the next 10 days. Dosage and 
frequency of administration of BAL is specific. Other symp-
tomatic and supportive therapy is required ( Klassen, 2019; 
Plumb, 2011; Peterson and Talcott, 2006).
6 Bleaching powder
Most common household bleach preparations contain so -
dium hypochlorite at concentrations between 3% and 
6%. Hypochlorite salts are widely used as disinfectants,

Common toxicological phenomenon in dogs and cats  Chapter | 26  397
 deodorizers, and water purifiers. Chlorine bleaches are re -
spiratory and eye irritants. Clinical signs are irritation of 
the oropharynx, salivation, vomiting, abdominal pain, chlo-
rine odor in exhaled air, bleaching of the hair, coughing, 
retching, and dyspnoea. Areas of dermal contact should be 
washed with mild soap and rinsed with abundant clean wa-
ter, administration of milk or water to dilute the ingested 
bleaching solution and other symptomatic and supportive 
therapy (Klassen, 2019).
7 Detergents, soaps, and shampoos
Mild detergents, soaps, and shampoos contain anionic and 
cationic detergents, which are mild irritants. Toxicity is lim-
ited to the ocular, oral, or GI tract, which is usually mild and 
 self- limiting. Cats exposed to undiluted shampoos or other 
products containing sodium lauryl sulfate may develop signifi-
cant respiratory distress, dyspnoea, increased bronchial secre-
tions, cyanosis, and mild pulmonary edema within 1–3 h of 
inhalation during grooming. Toxicity is due to interference by 
the detergent with normal pulmonary surfactants. In addition, 
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea are also seen. Dilution with milk 
or water, antiemetics, oxygen therapy, fluid therapy, and other 
general supportive and symptomatic care are recommended. 
For ocular exposures, irrigation of the eyes using tepid water or 
physiological saline is recommended (Plumb, 2011).
8 Ethanol
Ethanol intoxication is due to the ingestion of alcoholic 
drinks, raw bread dough, rotten apples, and indiscriminately 
using ethanol to treat ethylene glycol poisoning. It inhibits N-
methyl-d-aspartate glutamate receptors in the brain. Clinical 
signs are flatulence, bloating, abdominal pain, vomiting, 
retching, central nervous system depression, ataxia, lethargy, 
sedation, hypothermia, and metabolic acidosis. The smell 
of ethanol may be prevalent on the pet’s breath. Treatment 
for acidosis includes administration of sodium bicarbonate, 
fluid therapy, and supportive care ( V olmer and Meerdink, 
2002; Witmer and Fagerstone, 2003; Van Wuijckhuise and 
Cremer, 2003; Peterson and Talcott, 2006) (Fig. 1).
9 Grapes and Raisins
Grapes, raisins, sultanas, and currants may cause nephrotoxic-
ity in some dogs. The mechanism of action is unknown. The 
most common signs are lethargy, anorexia, nausea, vomiting, 
abdominal pain, diarrhea, uremic breath, excessive thirst, and 
excessive urination. Treatment includes decontamination, fluid 
therapy, antihistamines, and other supportive therapy (Eubig 
et al., 2005; Sutton et al., 2009).
10 Homemade and commercial play 
dough
Ingestion of homemade and commercial play dough causes 
severe hypernatremia in dogs. Commercial playdough 
contains 4.3% sodium. Clinical signs include vomiting, 
polydipsia, polyuria, tremors, hyperthermia, and seizures. 
Treatment includes decontamination, fluid, and supportive 
therapy (Peterson and Talcott, 2006).
11 Honey bees, wasps, and hornets
Wasps and hornets ( Vespidae) and Honey bees ( Apidae) 
possess a stinging apparatus with a modified ovipositor that 
is connected to a venom sac. They grasp the victim’s skin 
with their claws and insert their stinger into the skin. Vespids 
are generally able to withdraw their stingers and are capable 
of stinging again. The stinger of the honey bee is barbed 
so the stinger and venom sac remain attached to the vic -
tim’s skin when the bee flies away resulting in the insect’s 
death. The venom of apids contains melittin and formalde -
hyde. Venom of the vespids is a mixture of proteins, va -
soactive amines, peptides, acetylcholine, kinins, serotonin, 
hyaluronidase, and phospholipase A. Certain terrier breeds 
FIG. 1 Common household food toxicants for pets. (Courtesy: Vishnu Prabhu.)

398 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
and boxers are more sensitive to the venom. A single sting 
causes localized pain, erythema, and edema. Multiple stings 
cause anaphylaxis in dogs characterized by urticaria, pruri-
tus, angioedema, vomition, urination, weakness, respiratory 
and cardiovascular collapse, and seizures. Anaphylaxis in 
cats is characterized by pruritus, vocalization, hypersaliva -
tion, ataxia, and collapse. Treatment with antiemetics, an -
tihistamines, analgesics, anticonvulsants, and fluid therapy 
(Klassen, 2019; Peterson and Talcott, 2006).
12 Iron
Iron is a highly reactive element that triggers free radical 
production and lipid peroxidation. The target organ of tox -
icity is the gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and hepatic tis -
sues. Toxicity by oral exposure is more common than by 
injectable route. Vitamin E deficiency enhances iron toxic-
ity. Sources include gestational supplements, multivitamins 
or minerals, fertilizers, iron-EDTA slug and snail baits, 
hand warmers, and oxygen absorber sachets. Initial clinical 
signs are bloody vomitus, diarrhea, depression, GI hemor -
rhage, abdominal pain, circulatory shock, tremors, meta -
bolic acidosis, coagulopathy, and death. Treatment includes 
chelation therapy with deferoxamine mesylate which forms 
a nontoxic complex with ferric iron and gets excreted in the 
urine, which imparts a “von rose” (reddish brown) color to 
the urine. It is administered at the dose of 15 mg/kg, slow 
IV infusion, or 40 mg/kg IM q 4–6 h. In addition, decon -
tamination, ascorbic acid, antihistamines, fluid, and oxygen 
therapy (Brutlag et al., 2012; Klassen, 2019).
13 Lead
Lead toxicity is referred to as plumbism. Sources include 
lead-based paint, solder, sinkers, car batteries, golf balls, 
toys, candy bar wrappers, fungicides, herbicides, and lead 
projectiles. Bone is a sink for lead. Dogs are more sus -
ceptible and rarely seen in cats due to their fastidious eat -
ing habits. Lead inhibits the sulfhydryl group of essential 
enzymes of cellular metabolism. Chronic lead poisoning 
causes depression of bone marrow and hypochromic mi -
crocytic anemia. Anemia is a result of aminolevulinic acid 
synthetase, δ-aminolevulinic acid dehydratase (ALAD), 
coproporphyrinogen decarboxylase, and ferrochelatase 
inhibition. Clinical signs include vomiting, diarrhea, an -
orexia, abdominal pain, regurgitation due to megaesopha -
gus, hyperesthesia, hysterical barking, muscular spasms 
lethargy, blindness, and seizures. In intoxicated cats, 
nystagmus and ataxia are seen. Treatment includes spe -
cific therapy with Ca-disodium EDTA. Dogs and cats are 
dosed at 25 mg/kg (as 1% solution in 5% dextrose), SC, 4 
times daily for 5 days. The total dose should not exceed 
2 g/day due to the risk of nephrotoxicosis. Improvement 
is normally seen within 24–48 h. British Anti-Lewisite 
and Penicillamine are other lead chelators. Sodium EDTA 
should not be used for chelation, because of the risk of hy -
pocalcaemia. Concurrent zinc, calcium supplementation, 
anticonvulsants, diuretics, and fluid therapy should be fol -
lowed (Akhtar et al., 2003; Toscano et al., 2003).
14 Metaldehyde
Metaldehyde is an active component in molluscicides used 
to control slugs and snails. Its toxicity is termed as “shake 
and bake syndrome.” Dogs often eat baits voraciously, 
whereas cats in contrast are more selective in their eating 
behavior. The mechanism of toxic action likely involves 
alteration of neurotransmitters such as GABA, serotonin, 
and norepinephrine in the brain. The most common clini -
cal signs in dogs include tachycardia, temporary blindness, 
nystagmus, hyperpnea, ataxia, seizures, acidosis, cyanosis, 
diarrhea, dehydration, hypersensitivity to noise, light, and 
touch, and hyperthermia. Uncontrolled hyperthermia can 
lead to disseminated intravascular coagulopathy and mul -
tiple organ failure. Treatment for metaldehyde  poisoning 
includes decontamination, anticonvulsant, and other sup -
portive and symptomatic treatment ( Haldand and Davis, 
2009; Richardson et al., 2003; Talcott, 2004).
15 Methylxanthines: Caffeine, 
theobromine, theophylline
Theobromine and caffeine of methylxanthines are of toxi -
cological significance in chocolate and beverages. Pets 
are frequently attracted to these foods and beverages. The 
mechanism of toxicity may be due to competitive inhi -
bition of cellular adenosine receptors, cellular calcium 
reuptake inhibition, and competition for benzodiazepine 
receptors. The clinical signs include vomiting, restless -
ness, panting, weakness, hyperaesthesia, cyanosis, hy -
pertension, tachycardia, cardiac arrhythmias, tachypnoea, 
polyuria, polydipsia, hyperthermia, ataxia, tremors, sei -
zures, and coma. Death may occur from cardiac or respi -
ratory failure. Treatment includes antiarrhythmic drugs, 
emetics, purgatives, diazepam, and fluid therapy ( Klassen, 
2019; Plumb, 2011; Hovda and Kingston, 1994 ) (Fig.1).
16 Mothballs
Mothballs contain naphthalene or paradichlorobenzene 
(i.e., 1,4-dichlorobenzene). Paradichlorobenzene (PDB) is 
an organochlorine insecticide less toxic than naphthalene. 
Cats are more sensitive than dogs and ingestion of a single 
mothball is potentially harmful for a companion animal. 
Toxicity is due to its irritant nature and depletion of cellular 
glutathione leading to an increase in free radical tissue inju 
ry. Clinical signs are vomiting, naphthalene-scented breath, 
methemoglobinemia, hemolytic Heinz body  anemia,

Common toxicological phenomenon in dogs and cats  Chapter | 26  399
 hemoglobinuria. Treatment is with emetics, activated char-
coal, and a saline cathartic. About 1% methylene blue at 
the dose of 4 mg/ kg IV in dogs and 1.5 mg/kg in cats for 
methemoglobinemia and fluid therapy (Klassen, 2019).
17 Mushroom poisoning
Mushroom ingestion can occur all year round, but is most 
frequently during September and October. The most toxic 
mushrooms contain amanitin toxins. The target organ of 
toxicity is the liver and kidney. Amanitin inhibits RNA 
polymerase II, resulting in decreased protein synthesis 
and cell death. Clinical signs are anorexia, nausea, vomi -
tion, diarrhea, colic, fatigue, dehydration, polyuria, and 
polydipsia. Treatment is decontamination, gastrointes -
tinal and liver protectants, and fluid therapy ( Klassen, 
2019; Peterson and Talcott, 2006 ).
18 Organophosphate and carbamate 
insecticides
Organophosphate and carbamate insecticides are the most 
commonly used agrochemicals. Cats are more susceptible 
to chlorpyrifos intoxication than dogs. Both groups of in -
secticides inhibit acetylcholinesterase (AChE) activity. 
Organophosphate inhibits acetylcholinesterase enzyme irre-
versibly by binding to the esteratic site. Carbamates inhibit 
the enzyme reversibly by binding to both anionic and este -
ratic sites. Clinical signs of acute poisoning are  generally 
divided into three major categories. Muscarinic signs in -
clude salivation, lacrimation, urination, defecation, miosis, 
bronchospasm, bradycardia, and emesis. Nicotinic signs 
include muscle tremors, ataxia, weakness, and paralysis. 
Central nervous system signs can range from severe depres-
sion to hyperactivity and seizures. Local effects upon dermal 
exposure include sweating and muscle fasciculations at the 
contact site. Treatment with specific antidotes, i.e., atropine 
and pralidoxime (2-pyridine aldoxime methyl chloride) or 
2-PAM for organophosphate poisoning. Carbamate poison-
ing is treated with only atropine as an antidote. Atropine is 
a competitive antagonist of Ach for muscarinic receptors. 
Pralidoxime is an enzyme reactivator. It reactivates the phos-
phorylated acetylcholine esterase enzyme by binding to the 
anionic site. AchE reactivators are not effective after the ‘ag-
ing’ of the phosphorylated enzyme. Aging is due to losing 
one alkyl or alkoxy group, leaving much more stable mono-
alkyl or monoalkoxy phosphorylated AChE. Atropine at the 
dose of 1–2 mg/kg. About ¼ of the dose is given IV and ¾ 
IM /SC followed by the same or half dose at 4–6 h intervals 
by IM or SC until clinical signs subside. Pralidoxime chlo -
ride at the dose of 20 mg/kg slow IV or SQ q 12 h slowly 
over 15–30 min. Other treatment options include decon -
tamination, GI protectants, antiemetics, anticonvulsants, and 
fluid therapy (Klassen, 2019; Plumb, 2011).
19 Paintballs
Paintball toxicosis is seen in dogs and rarely in cats. The 
potential ingredients in paintball include polyethylene 
glycol, glycerine, gelatin, sorbitol, dipropylene glycol, 
mineral oil, dye, ground pigskin, and water. Clinical signs 
include vomiting, ataxia, diarrhea, tremors tachycardia, 
weakness, hyperactivity, hyperthermia, blindness, and 
seizures. The main clinical pathologic changes include 
hypernatremia, hyperchloremia, acidosis, and hypoka -
lemia. Treatment includes decontamination, anticonvul -
sants, fluid therapy with 5% dextrose in water, or 2.5% 
dextrose in 0.45% saline, at 1.5–2 times maintenance, 
and IV potassium at a rate not to exceed 0.5 mEq/kg/h 
(Plumb, 2011 ).
20 Plant poisoning
Exposure to toxic ornamental plants is a relatively com -
mon occurrence, and cats appear to be more sensitive 
and at risk than dogs, presumably because they tend to 
chew plant leaves. The plants which are toxic to com -
panion animals are Liliaceae, Araceae, oleander ( Nerium 
oleander), castor bean ( Ricinus communis ), Jimson weed 
(Datura stramonium ), Dumbcane ( Dieffenbachia  spp.), 
Ficus (Ficus benjamina), Pittosporo (Pittosporum tobira ), 
Poinsettia ( Euphorbia pulcherrima ), Rhododendron 
(Rhododendrum hirsutum ), Tiger lily ( Lilium tigrinum ), 
Jessamine (Jasminum officinalis ), Tansy ragwort (Senecio 
jacobaea), etc. 
Acalypha hispida: It contains diterpene esters, euphorb 
latex. It causes gastroenteritis and eye irritant.
Aglaonema spp.: It contains insoluble calcium oxalate 
and soluble oxalates. It irritates the skin and mucous 
membrane, salivation, and vomiting.
Aloe spp.: It contains Barbaloin, anthraquinone glyco -
sides. It inhibits stomach acid secretion, inhibits water 
and electrolyte absorption, cathartic, abdominal cramp -
ing, and diarrhea.
Croton tiglium: V omiting, diarrhea, conjunctival hyper-
emia, punctate staining of the cornea, giddiness, delir -
ium, and convulsions. Crotin in seeds, tigliane phorbol 
esters in seed oil and sap.
Hosta spp.: Also known as Hosta lily or August lily. 
Some species contain saponins, which can cause vomit-
ing, diarrhea, depression, and anorexia.
Dieffenbachia spp.: Salivation, vomition, dysphagia, 
airway obstruction, stupor, corneal abrasion, and hy -
pocalcemic tetany. Diagnosis is mainly based on cir -
cumstantial evidence and history. There is no specific 
antidote for the plant toxicity. Treatment is symptomatic 
and supportive (Klassen, 2019; Oehme and Kore, 2006; 
Plumb, 2011) (Figs. 2–6).

400 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
21 Pyrethrins and pyrethroids
Pyrethrins are natural insecticides obtained from the flow -
ers of Chrysanthemum  spp. and pyrethroids are synthetic 
compounds. Commonly used insecticides for fleas, ticks, 
lice, and mosquitoes. Many combination products include 
a synergist (piperonyl butoxide) or an insect growth regu -
lator (IGR) such as methoprene, pyriproxyfen, hydropene, 
and fenoxycarb. Cats are more sensitive than most other 
species to pyrethrins and pyrethroids. The primary mode 
of action is inhibiting the inactivation of sodium channel 
opening which causes persistent depolarization resulting 
in spastic paralysis. Also inhibits GABA-gated chloride 
channels, Ca 2+–ATPase, and Ca2+-Mg3+-ATPase. Sensory 
nerve fibers are more susceptible to stimulation because 
of differences in sodium channel kinetics. Clinical signs 
include hypersalivation, hyper- or hypothermia, paraes -
thesia, “paw flicking,” vomiting, hyperexcitability, trem -
ors, ataxia, weakness, dyspnoea, seizures, and death. 
Treatment includes emetics, purgatives, anticonvulsants, 
atropine, and other supportive care ( Boland and Angles, 
2010; Wolansky and Harril, 2008; Zimmermann et  al., 
2009; Klassen, 2019 ).
22 Silica gel containing desiccant packs
Silica gel containing desiccant packs are moisture absorbents 
commonly found in shoe boxes, lamps, medication bottles, 
electronic equipment, and food items. The packs can be paper 
or plastic packets or plastic cylinders with powder, granular, 
or liquid contents. The main active ingredient is mainly silica 
gel and some can contain iron. It causes mild gastrointestinal 
irritation following oral exposure. Treatment is symptomatic 
and supportive care (Plumb, 2011).
23 Snake poisoning
Viperine envenomation is common in dogs. Cats are more 
resistant than dogs. Venom contains hemotoxins that al -
ter the clotting mechanism. Local clinical signs include 
FIG. 2 Target organ toxicity by different toxic indoor plants. (Courtesy: Harsha Sagar.)

Common toxicological phenomenon in dogs and cats  Chapter | 26  401
 angioedema, fang punctures–not always two punctures, 
may be multiple scratches, edema and swelling, bleeding 
from the bite site, erythema, ecchymosis, and lymphangi -
tis. Systemic clinical signs include hypotension, dyspnoea, 
weakness, epistaxis, hematuria, melena, retinal hemor -
rhage, excessive salivation, fasciculations, vomiting, diar -
rhea, and oliguria. Elapine venom contains neurotoxins. 
They act at presynaptic and postsynaptic sites at the neu -
romuscular junction. Neurotoxins inhibit the release of 
acetylcholine presynaptically and block neurotransmission. 
They also bind to cholinergic receptors in the neuromus -
cular junctions and antagonize the action of acetylcholine. 
Also, contain an acetylcholinesterase enzyme that de -
stroys acetylcholine. Both dogs and cats are susceptible. 
FIG. 3 Common toxic plants for pets. (Courtesy: Harsha Sagar and Vishnu Prabhu.)

402 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
Cats develop  primarily neurologic signs such as progres -
sive ascending flaccid paralysis, decreased nociception, 
CNS depression, diminished spinal reflexes, hypotension, 
respiratory depression, anisocoria, myoglobinemia, and 
hypothermia. In dogs, CNS depression, decreased spinal re-
flexes, muscle weakness, respiratory depression, vomiting, 
hypersalivation, hypotension, dyspnoea, dysphagia, muscle 
fasciculation, tachycardia, and hemolysis. Death occurs 
due to respiratory paralysis. Antivenom is the definitive 
antidote for venomous snakebite. The choice of antivenin 
depends on the species of snake involved. It may be either 
monovalent or polyvalent. The dose is 100 mL (total dose) 
of which 5–10 mL is injected into the tissues around the 
bite and the remainder is given by IV route. The dose of 
FIG. 4 Common toxic plants for pets. (Courtesy: Harsha Sagar and Vishnu Prabhu.)

Common toxicological phenomenon in dogs and cats  Chapter | 26  403
antivenin depends on the species of snake and the severity 
of envenomation. The use of corticosteroids in the treatment 
of pit viper envenomation is not recommended. Tetanus an-
titoxin should be administered to avoid clostridial infection 
after snake bite. Antibiotics, analgesics, antiemetics, fluid 
therapy, and other supportive care ( Berdoulay et al., 2005; 
Chrisman et al., 1996; Kerrigan et al., 1997; Seibold et al., 
2010; Woods and Young, 2011) (Fig. 7).
24 Toad poisoning
Colorado river toad (Bufo alvarius) and marine or cane toad 
(Bufo marinus) are the most common toads that cause toxicity.  
Toad venom contains bufogenins, bufotoxins,  dopamine, 
epinephrine, norepinephrine, serotonin, and bufotenine. 
Bufagenins and bufotoxins are digitalis-like substances. 
They inhibit the Na+/K+ ATPase pump in the cardiac cells. 
FIG. 5 Common toxic plants for pets. (Courtesy: Vishnu Prabhu, Harsha Sagar, Anushree.)

404 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
Normally, the Na+/K+-ATPase pumps sodium into the cell 
and potassium out of the cell. However, when this pump is 
inhibited, the cell relies on the Na+/Ca2+ pump to maintain its 
sodium gradient, which pumps sodium out and calcium into 
the cell. This results in increased intracellular calcium con-
centration leading to excessive cardiac stimulation, tachycar-
dia, ventricular fibrillation, and cardiac arrest. Bufotoxins are 
vasoconstrictors and add to the pressor effect of bufotenine to 
increase systemic vascular resistance. Clinical signs include 
hypersalivation, pawing at the mouth, brick-red mucous mem-
branes, hyperthermia, hyperkalemia, ataxia, collapse, and sei-
zures. Sinus tachycardia, sinus bradycardia, and ventricular 
arrhythmias are commonly observed. Treatment consists of 
flushing the oral cavity with water to remove venom, anticon-
vulsants, atropine, antiarrhythmic agents, and supportive care 
(Eubig, 2001; Roberts et al., 2000; Klassen, 2019).
FIG. 6 Common toxic plans for pets. (Courtesy: Vishnu Prabhu, Harsha Sagar, Anushree, and Devraj.)

Common toxicological phenomenon in dogs and cats  Chapter | 26  405
25 Xylitol
Xylitol is an artificial sweetener found in many food items 
(e.g., gum, candy), medications (e.g., drugs, vitamins), and 
dental care products (e.g., toothpaste, mouthwash), the sweet-
ener in products for diabetic patients. Dogs are most commonly 
affected. History and circumstantial evidence play a crucial 
role in the diagnosis of xylitol poisoning. Hypoglycemia, hy-
pokalemia, hypophosphatemia, and liver failure are potential 
problems with xylitol. Treatment involves symptomatic and 
supportive care ( Dunayer, 2004; Dunayer and Gwaltney-
Brant, 2006; Peterson and Talcott, 2006) (Fig. 1).
26 Zinc phosphide
Zinc phosphide is a common rodenticide. It reacts chemi -
cally in the acidic environment and liberates phosphine 
gas, which acts as a systemic poison. It blocks the enzyme 
cytochrome oxidase and also acts as an irritant to the GI, 
respiratory, or CNS effects. Clinical signs include anorexia, 
vomiting, hematemesis, melena, shock, anxiety, tremors, 
seizures, blindness, nystagmus, paddling, and disorienta -
tion. Phosphine gas imparts garlic or rotten fish smell to 
intoxicated animal breath or vomitus. Treatment includes 
gastric lavage with 5% sodium bicarbonate, emetics, de -
mulcents, protectants, anticonvulsants, and other symptom-
atic and supportive care ( Easterwood et  al., 2010; Gurjar 
et al., 2011; Peterson and Talcott, 2006).
27 Prevention
● Over-the-counter drugs are commonly available in 
homes. So appropriate pet proofing and client educa -
tion is important to prevent accidental or iatrogenic 
intoxication.
● Alcohol and alcohol-containing products should be ap -
propriately stored as they are dangerous for pets.
● Insecticides having low persistence in the environment 
should be used. All insecticides should be stored af -
ter proper labeling. After use, all the empty containers 
should be properly disposed of.
● Avoid potassium permanganate in viperine envenom -
ation as it exacerbates tissue damage.
● Alcohol should not be used to clean the snake bite 
wound as it causes vasodilatation and promotes the up -
take and spread of snake venom.

406 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Common toxicological phenomenon in dogs and cats  Chapter | 26  407

409

Chapter 27
Anesthesia and pain management  
in dogs and cats
Anesthesia means loss of feeling, which may be defined as 
a condition of unconsciousness produced by a process of 
controlled intoxication of the nervous system either locally 
or generally over the body resulting into lowered sensitivity 
and diminished motor response to afferent stimuli ( Lumb 
and Jones, 1997).
The evolution of veterinary anesthesia has been ex -
tensive in the later part of 1960s since its first use in 2250 
BC on a Babylonian clay table and the use of many crude 
physical methods to produce unconsciousness in 17th cen -
tury by Assyrians and Italians ( Aiello and Mays, 1998 ). 
Introduction of general anesthesia in small animal surgery 
turns out to be more widely accepted after introduction of 
barbiturates particularly after the discovery of thiopental 
sodium. Intravenous drug administration to provide anes -
thesia has evolved in the last decade to become popular al -
ternative to inhalation anesthesia (Fig. 1).
Total intravenous anesthesia (TIV A) is a technique of 
general anesthesia using a combination of agents given 
solely by the intravenous route and in the absence of all 
inhalation agents including nitrous oxide, which is gaining 
importance in recent years due to its simplicity to use in the 
field condition without involvement of much costly instru -
ments or equipment and skilled personnel ( Dundee and 
Wyqant, 1988). TIV A, a new intravenous drug delivery sys-
tem, allows anesthetics to vary anesthetic depth in response 
to clinical signs in a manner intuitively similar conventional 
to volatile systems, thus simplifying the administration of 
intravenous anesthesia. The result is an easy-to-use modern 
system of providing anesthesia, which allows rapid, precise, 
and independent control of amnesia, hypnosis, and analgesia.
Principally, the administration of anesthetic compounds 
in veterinary surgical maneuver is to facilitate the perfor -
mance of the operation of its own shake, by depriving the 
patient of the power of obstructing and frustrating its execu-
tion to his own detriment, by the violence of his struggles 
and the persistency of his resistance (Hall, 1996).
1 Preanesthetic preparation
1.1 Preparation of the animals on the day 
before experiment
Patient should receive the general health care, routine labo-
ratory and clinical investigations, vaccinations, deworming 
against both external and internal parasites. Routine gen -
eral clinical examination like recordings of temperature, 
pulse, respiration, and heart rate should be conducted be -
fore experiment. Routine examination of stool, urine analy-
sis, routine examination of blood for complete hemogram 
and biochemical estimations should be done to assess their 
health status before conducting the actual experiment. The 
patients are kept off-fed and off-water for 12 and 6 h, re-
spectively, before the commencement of anesthetic proce -
dure (Fig. 2).
1.2 Preparation of the animals prior  
to experiment
The patient is weighed just before the anesthetic pro -
cedure. The specific clinical findings, i.e., temperature, 
respiratory rate, heart rate and SPO 2 should be recorded. 
Afterward, the animal should be restrained on the op -
eration theater table in lateral recumbency, and pre -
anesthetic blood is collected from either radial vein or 
recurrent tarsal vein, the sites of which were prepared 
aseptically, for hematological studies and biochemical 
studies, if needed. Fluid administration should be ar -
ranged to correct the dehydration and electrolyte imbal -
ance if any as well as to provide drug by intravenous 
route. Preanesthetic antibiotics and corticosteroids 
should be administered prior to major surgery as re -
quired. Oxygen administration by nasal catheter, mask 
or tracheotomy under local anesthesia is indicated prior 
to general anesthesia (GA).

410 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
2 Vein cannulation
Patient is generally restrained in lateral recumbency. Then 
the areas above the recurrent tarsal vein and cephalic vein 
are washed with soap water followed by savlon and shaving 
of that area was done. The sites were washed with 70% al -
cohol followed by povidone iodine 5% solution. Either right 
or left recurrent tarsal vein or cephalic vein is cannulated as 
per the surgical procedure and recumbency with 20–24  G 
needle or IV catheter.
2.1 Endotracheal intubation during anesthesia
After induction of anesthesia, when the jaw muscles have 
been entirely relaxed, keeping the dog’s or cat’s head and 
neck in a straight line with one hand holding the top jaw, 
thumb, and forefinger either side of the jaw behind the ca -
nine teeth and holding the upper lips up and away from the 
teeth, patient’s tongue is pulled rostrally to spread open the 
larynx (Jackson et al., 2004). Then the blade of the laryngo-
scope is placed flat on the tongue with the tip of the blade 
depressing the tongue at the base of the epiglottis. The lu -
bricated tube is then used to depress the epiglottis on to the 
tongue and kept it there while the tube itself is advanced 
in front of the arytenoid cartilages into the trachea ( Cassu 
et al., 2003). Then the hidden inflation cuff is inflated, and 
the degree of inflation was determined by assessing the sig-
nal balloon outside. The diameters of the endotracheal tubes 
are within 2–15 mm as per the requirement (Fig. 3).
2.2 Monitoring
Anesthetic monitoring is important to sustain a proper plane 
of anesthesia. To prevent excessive stress to the cardiovas -
cular, respiratory and central nervous systems, it is neces -
sary to monitor them accordingly (Tarraga et al., 2000).
Anesthetic depth can be measured by inspection of the 
following signs like physical movement or jaw chewing, 
swallowing in response to stimulation, eye positioning, 
degree of muscle tone and presence or absence of corneal 
reflexes, palpebral reflexes, etc. Cardiac monitor is used to 
monitor the cardiovascular system containing heart rate, 
pulse pressure, mucous membrane color, and capillary refill 
time (Bayan et al., 2002; Bennett et al., 1998). Direct blood 
pressure measurement can give continuous hemodynamic 
condition of the animal and can be easily accomplished 
through catheterizing the dorsopedal artery. The respiratory 
system is evaluated by monitoring respiratory rate as well 
as volume. It can be anticipated by observing the emptying 
of the rebreathing bag of the anesthetic machine for the pe-
riod of respiratory cycles. Pulse oximetry and arterial blood 
gas analysis give information of the ventilatory efficiency. 
The ECG is helpful to monitor cardiac arrhythmias. Ocular 
reflexes are generally used to monitor the central nervous 
system. Ophthalmic ointment and solutions should be ap -
plied to the eyes during anesthesia (anesthesia in cat with 
Ketamine) to prevent corneal injury (Fig. 4).
FIG. 1 Prolapsed third eyelid under barbiturate anesthesia.
FIG. 2 Some anesthetic, preanesthetics, and local anesthetics.
FIG. 3 Endotracheal intubated anesthetized dog.

Anesthesia and pain management in dogs and cats   Chapter | 27  411
3 Postanesthetic care
After anesthesia or surgery recovery is started which ended 
until the animal was alert, ambulatory, and all physiologi -
cal parameters have returned to normal ranges ( Buhl et al., 
2001). Deflation of endotracheal tube cuff is done in lat -
eral recumbency when animal shows gag rejection reflex 
(Nogueira et al., 2003 ). When the anesthesiologist feels as 
the patient is out of caution, the IV catheter is removed. 
Monitoring of temperature is indicated to check hypother -
mia (less than 98°F) or hyperthermia (more than 103°F) 
if any which should be treated accordingly. V omition, hy -
peractivity, vocalization, etc., should be treated or checked 
accordingly.
All animals should be observed for 15  days after anes -
thetic procedure, and regular general clinical examinations 
should be done to assess their clinical status. Postoperative 
care including fluid therapy, antibiotics and dressings of 
the operative site and removal of suture should be done to 
the patients where applicable. Vitamin and mineral supple-
mentation with adequate nutritious food and drinking wa -
ter should be supplied to all the animals during the entire 
course of postanesthetic care.
4 General anesthesia
A general anesthetic to a fit dog should bear little risk to the 
animal’s life. Though the mortality rate is very low, mor -
bidity due to anesthesia, which is often overlooked, is not 
unusual. In human anesthesia, severe hypoxic brain dam -
age can decrease intelligence following general anesthesia, 
and similar happenings may happen in dogs. Owners may 
mention that their dog is never the same since the anesthe -
sia which may indicate a cerebral anoxic damage before 
surgery. Another more dramatic and obvious cause of post-
anesthetic morbidity in dogs is renal failure. Many elderly 
dogs suffer from some degree of interstitial nephritis or 
CKD, and in such animals, even mild renal hypoxia may 
prove critical within a relatively small time.
4.1 Preanesthetic agents
Preanesthetic agents are used to prepare the patient for 
administration of anesthetic agents. A good preanesthetic 
sedation reduces salivary secretions, facilitates smooth in -
duction, has anesthetic sparing effect during maintenance 
and by increasing the margin of safety.
There are four choices available.
1. Anticholinergics (Atropin sulfate, Hyoscine, 
Glycopyrrolate)
Anticholinergics are not regularly administered as com-
ponent of preanesthetic medication. Use of atropine or 
glycopyrrolate is indicated for animals with elevated 
resting vagal tone (e.g., brachycephalics) and proce -
dures likely to augment vagal stimulation (e.g., ocular 
surgery). Recommended dosages are: atropine 0.02–
0.04 mg/kg IV , IM, SC; hyoscine 0.01–0.02 mg/kg and 
glycopyrrolate 2–10 μg/kg IV , IM, SC.
2. Morphine and its substitutes (Morphine, Meperidine 
HCl, Methadone, Fentanyl, Etorphine, Butorphanol, 
Pentazocine)
They are generally used to provide analgesia in dogs. It 
provides better sedation with analgesia when combined 
with other sedatives. Morphine is inexpensive and is 
used in the dose of 0.25–1  mg/kg IM, SC. Intravenous 
morphine induces histamine release mainly if given 
as a rapid bolus, but measured administration is less 
likely to cause troubles. Oxymorphone causes a smaller 
amount vomiting than morphine and hydromorphone, 
so is better choice for patients with head trauma, eye 
injury and gastrointestinal disorders. Fentanyl is given 
@ 0.05–2 mg/kg by IV or IM, whereas butorphanol is 
given @ 0.01–0.05 mg/kg by IM or SC (cat).
3. Tranquilizers (Chlorpromazine HCl, Triflupromazine 
HCl, Promethazine HCl, Acepromazine, Alpha-2 
Agonists like Xylazine, medetomidine, etc., 
Benzodiazepine derivative like Diazepam)
Chlorpromazine HCl and Triflupromazine HCl are an -
tiemetic, central depressant with tranquilizing potency 
are used @ 1 mg/kg IMly in dog and cats. Acepromazine 
provides mild sedation at clinically prescribed dose 
(0.01–0.05 mg/kg IV , IM, SC). It is anti-arrhythmic but 
prolonged duration ( Mansell and Parry, 1992 ). It re -
quires at least 20  min for good effect even after IV in -
jection, and 30–45  min when given IM and longer for 
SC. Premedication dose of 0.04 mg/kg IM has minimum 
cardiovascular effect in healthy dogs.
Diazepam and midazolam are calming, minor tran -
quilizer with excellent muscle relaxation effect. They 
cause minimal cardiopulmonary depression. They may 
cause paradoxical excitement. They are best with other 
FIG. 4 Monitoring of anesthetized patient by cardiac monitor.

412 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
CNS depressants (e.g., ketamine). In canine, they are 
given @ 0.1–0.5 mg/kg by IV .
Xylazine is potent non-narcotic, sedative, and analge-
sic with CNS depression effect, whereas cardiovascular 
depression can be profound (Sharma and Kumar, 1986). 
It causes vomiting, hyperglycemia, diuresis, GIT motil-
ity depression, and platelet aggregation. Now it is largely 
displaced by medetomidine. In canine and feline, it is 
given @ 1–2 mg/kg by IM or SC (Andress et al., 1995).
Medetomidine causes less vomiting than xylazine. 
It is given @ 5–40  μg/kg IM, SC to produce sedation. 
Intravenous administration is associated with more se -
vere form of dysrhythmias, so generally is not recom -
mended. Time of sedation lasts approximately for 1  h. 
The pharmacologic property of medetomidine in dogs is 
very similar to those of xylazine in that it produces bra-
dycardia, hyperglycemia and increased urine production 
(Joubert and Lobetti, 2002).
Romifidine is the most recent alpha 2 agonists which 
reduces the amount required for the anesthetic induction 
in dose-dependent manner. It produces dose-dependent 
cardiovascular depression. It is given @ 10–80 μg/kg IM 
or SC.
4. Sedative/opioid combination (neuroleptanalgesia) is 
most accepted which provides better restraint and anal -
gesia as the combination is synergistic, not merely addi-
tive as preanesthetic medication.
Innovar-Vet contains 0.4 mg/mL of fentanyl and 20 mg/
mL of droperidol which are narcotic analgesic and 
tranquilizer. It is given @ 1  mL/10 kg IM or SC. 1:1 
methadone- acepromazine is effective and reliable re -
straint for dogs and cats which is given @ 1  mg of each 
methadone-acepromazine per kg of dogs and cats.
5 Parenteral anesthetic agents
5.1 Barbiturates
5.1.1 Thiopental sodium
In the United Kingdom, thiopental was introduced into vet-
erinary practice in 1937 and over the next 60 years came to 
be the most widely used induction agent, especially for cats 
and dogs ( Curtis and Evans, 1981 ). It is a thiobarbiturate 
which occurs as a bitter-testing, white to off-white crystal -
line powder or as a yellow white hydroscopic powder. It is 
soluble in water and alcohol. It is a weak organic acid pKa 
of 7.6. It is usually mixed with saline or water to form 2.5%, 
5.0%, 6.4% (1 g/mL), or 10% solution. Thiopental sodium 
has a shorter duration of activity partly due to its high af -
finity for fat (particularly blood fat) and partly because it is 
metabolized in the liver quite rapidly during the early stages 
of anesthesia (Reddy et al., 2003). When stored in dry form, 
thiopental sodium is stable. After reconstruction, solutions 
are stable for 3 days at room temperature and for 7 days un-
der refrigeration. However, as no preservative is present, it 
is recommended to be used within 24  h of reconstruction. 
As the solution age becomes turbid crystals precipitate re -
sulting in progressive loss of activity with the same level of 
toxicity and large quantities of solution is needed to produce 
desired effect. Thiopental is used @ 6–8 mg/kg body weight 
for rapid induction of shorter duration and 20–30 mg/kg for 
surgical anesthesia without premedication by solely intrave-
nous route (Grimm et al., 1998).
5.1.2 Pentobarbitone sodium
The solution of pentobarbitone has a very high pH, and the 
drug can only be given intravenously. Induction in unpremed-
icated dogs can be achieved at the dose of 20 mg/kg IV given 
the half dose as a rapid bolus and the remaining given titrated 
to effect. Maximum total dose for a fit dog is 25 mg/kg.
5.1.3 Thiamylal sodium
The solution of thiamylal has a very high pH like thiopental, 
and the drug can only be given intravenously @ 18–25 mg/kg.  
Recovery is through redistribution of the agent from the 
brain into the other tissues causes prolonged recovery with 
hang-overs lasting for 24 h or more.
5.2 Nonbarbiturate agents
5.2.1 Propofol
Propofol, 2,6-diisopropylphenol is a rapidly metabolized, 
nonbarbiturate sedative/hypnotic anesthetic drug ( Alves 
et  al., 2003; Murrel et  al., 2005 ) that is administered in -
travenously to small animals to induce sedation and anes -
thesia (Apaydin et al., 2006 ; Dorrington, 1989). It is now 
presented as free flowing oil in water emulsion containing 
10% (w/v) soybean oil, 1.2% (w/v) purified egg phosphate 
and 2.25% (w/v) glycerol. Propofol should be stored below 
22°C and above 4°C. It should be protected from light and 
need to shake well before use. Propofol emulsion supports 
bacterial growth and endotoxin production. Hence, once the 
ampoule is opened, unused portion should be discarded af -
ter 6 h. If diluted solution is needed, it is compatible with 5% 
dextrose in water (Lim et al., 2000). It is used @ 4–6 mg/kg 
body weight with premedication by solely intravenous route 
(Heldmann et al., 1999).
5.2.2 Ketamine
Ketamine is a dissociative anesthetic which exerts signifi -
cant degree of analgesia by blocking the phenylcyclidine 
site in the ion channel associated with N-methyl-d-aspartate 
(NDMA) receptor.
It causes catalepsy, catatonia, amnesia along with an -
algesia. It is used at a dose rate of 10  mg/kg IV alone and 
5 mg/kg IV with diazepam @0.5  mg/kg IV for dogs and 
11–33 mg/kg IM for cats.

Anesthesia and pain management in dogs and cats   Chapter | 27  413
5.2.3 Tiletamine and Zolazepam (Telazol)
It is mainly used to provide deep sedation in dogs. Telazol 
up to 4  mg/kg IV to effect produces deep sedation or light 
anesthesia in both canine and feline. Side effects like emer-
gence delirium, respiratory depression, hypersalivation, 
etc., are common and manageable. Sedatives and opioids 
can be mixed to make the final constituent more effective so 
as to enhance sedation, analgesia and duration of effect, and 
reduce side effects. The drug can be given intramuscularly 
@ 6.6–13.2 mg/kg in dogs and 8.8–15.4 mg/kg in cats.
5.2.4 Propofol-thiopental sodium mixture  
as TIVA
Recently, a synergistic hypnotic interaction has been re -
ported between thiopental and propofol so that a combina -
tion of the agents has greater effects than either of the agents 
alone (Ko et al., 1999; Rashiq et al., 1998). This could result 
from pharmacological interaction, probably at the GABA 
receptor complex. Generally, a 1:1 volume mixture of pro -
pofol (1%) and thiopental (2.5%) is used such that 1  mL 
of the mixture contains 5  mg of propofol and 12.5  mg of 
thiopental.
5.2.5 Ketamine-Medetomidine
Medetomidine at 5–40 μg/kg added to ketamine at 2–5  mg/
kg given either IM or IV causes deep sedation and recum -
bency in canine. Butorphanol 0.1–0.4  mg/kg IV , IM can be 
included in this combination for better sedation, analgesia, 
and muscle relaxation.
5.2.6 Ketamine-Diazepam
This combination produces less cardiovascular depression 
than xylazine-ketamine. Diazepam @ 0.1–0.4  mg/kg and 
ketamine 5 mg/kg given IV as a bolus or titrated to effect, 
or IM injection produce recumbency and status similar to 
general anesthesia in 2–10 min (Ameerjan and Mohammad, 
1990).
5.3 Inhalational anesthesia
The advantages are patent airway, swift control of anes -
thetic depth, good control over anesthesia, fast and smooth 
recovery, and disadvantages are more pronounced cardio -
vascular depression with myocardial depression, hypoten -
sion, constant surveillance by anesthetist and bradycardia.
5.3.1 Anesthetic machine
It is a device where fresh gas flow of medical gas is gener -
ated and mixed with inhalation anesthetic agents (gaseous 
or volatile) for induction and maintenance of anesthesia. 
Most frequent type of machine which is used as continu -
ous flow anesthetic machine is Boyle’s machine which 
is designed to mix accurate fresh gas flow of medical 
gas with accurate inhalation anesthetic agents (gaseous 
or volatile), and it provides gas flow only on demand of 
patient’s requirement triggered by patient’s inspiration 
(Fig. 5).
5.3.2 Minimum alveolar concentration (MAC)
Minimum alveolar concentration is the concentration of a 
vapor in alveoli that is required to prevent motor response or 
movement in 50% of subject in response to surgical stimuli 
or pain. It is used to compare strength or potency of inha -
lation anesthetics. A lower MAC value represents a more 
potent inhalation anesthetic (Fig. 6).
FIG. 5 Boyle’s apparatus and cardiac monitor.
FIG.  6 Cat under pain management after surgery (IM Pinning and 
Thomas Splint).

414 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
5.3.3 Nitrous oxide
It is a week, nontoxic anesthetic. Analgesia from nitrous 
oxide decreases inhalational anesthetic requirement; there -
fore, less cardiovascular depression occurs. It is given with 
20%–25% of oxygen to the lungs. The potency of nitrous 
oxide is only half that of human, so the sparing effect is not 
as obvious. Use of this agent is not extensive in dogs.
5.3.4 Halothane
It is noninflammable, nonirritant and nonexplosive inha -
lation anesthetic which may cause arrhythmias ( Bose and 
Kohli, 1983). MAC of halothane in dog is 0.8%. Vapor set-
ting is at 3%–4% at induction with oxygen flow at 60  mL/
kg/min and is reduced between 1% and 3% during the 
maintenance with oxygen flow at 20  mL/kg/min. This has 
been largely displaced by isoflurane. As anesthesia is deep-
ened by increasing halothane concentration, CO and arte -
rial pressure decrease further. HR usually remains constant. 
Bradycardia and postanesthetic shivering are also common 
(Lindgren, 1981). MAC of halothane in cat is 1.19%.
5.3.5 Isoflurane
It is used though it is more expensive than halothane, but 
now much more affordable and has replaced halothane both 
in human and veterinary practice universally. It is quicker 
anesthetic regarding stabilization and more rapid recovery 
than halothane due to its low blood gas solubility ( Kim 
et al., 2003). MAC in dogs is 1.3% and 1.61% in cats. Vapor 
setting is at 3%–4% in dogs at induction with oxygen flow 
at 60 mL/kg/min and is reduced between 1% and 3% dur -
ing the maintenance with oxygen flow at 20  mL/kg/min. 
Isoflurane as halothane induces a dose-dependent cardio -
vascular depression (Gunay and Unsaldi, 2000). Isoflurane 
causes more peripheral vasodilation than halothane, which 
is responsible for a low arterial blood pressure, but tissue 
looks more bright and pinky indicating better perfusion. 
Isoflurane is less prone to cause arrhythmia compared to 
halothane. It is with good cardiovascular stability, low blood 
solubility, and suitable for hepatic patients as it is resistant 
to hepatic metabolism.
5.3.6 Sevoflurane
It is one of the newest, noninflammable, and nonexplosive 
inhalation anesthetic. The anesthetic induction, recovery 
and intraoperative modulation of anesthetic depths of sevo-
flurane is faster than halothane and isoflurane. It is more 
expensive than halothane and isoflurane, but it is getting 
less expensive. Sevoflurane is less potent than halothane 
or isoflurane, but more potent than desflurane. MAC in 
dogs is 2.3% and 2.61% in cats. Sevoflurane induces dose-  
dependent cardiovascular depression to a degree similar to 
that of isoflurane. Analgesic property is minimal.
5.3.7 Desflurane
It is one of the newest, highly volatile, and less soluble in -
halation anesthetic. Cardiovascular effects of desflurane are 
similar with those of isoflurane ( Kleinsasser et  al., 2000). 
It has lower blood/gas partition coefficient than other inhal-
ants mentioned above, so control of anesthetic depth is the 
quickest among the volatile agents in veterinary practice 
(Dos et al., 2000). It has the least potency among the volatile 
anesthetics (MAC 7%–10% in canines). It is expensive as 
sevoflurane and requires electronically controlled vaporizer 
as it is boils at room temperature. Concentration of 12%–
18% for induction and 8%–10% for maintenance is required.
5.4 Local and regional anesthesia
Equipment:
Syringes: 0.2–10 mL as required.
Needle: 22–25 G needle.
Different types of local and regional anesthesia:
1. General tissue infiltration : It is also called field block 
where nerve endings are blocked by directly injecting or 
around into the incision or wound site.
2. Oral/Dental block: Excessive mouth opening must be 
avoided in cats to avoid impaired blood flow to cere -
brum to cause neurologic deficits or blindness.
Auriculopalpebral nerve block: Needle must be inserted 
subfacially over the midpoint of posterior third of zygo-
matic arch. 2–5 mL of local anesthetic required for dog.
Retrobulba nerve block: Special curved needle for retro-
bulba nerve block must be inserted through the lateral can-
thus of the eye. 3–5 mL of local anesthetic required for dog.
Maxillary nerve block : Needle is inserted in line 
with the eye just below the zygomatic arch and directed 
toward the pterygopalatine fossa to inject 2–4 mL of 2% 
local anesthetic.
Mandibulo-alveolar nerve block : The needle is in -
serted medial and parallel to the long axis of sixth molar 
with the points inclined toward mandible.
Infraorbital nerve block : The upper lip is lifted, 
and infraorbital foramen is palpated above third pre -
molar where slightly curved needle is inserted to inject 
0.5–2 mL of 2% local anesthetic.
Mental nerve block : Mental foramen is situated be -
low the first molar in dog and cat. The needle is in -
serted directly into the foramen to inject 0.5–2  mL of 
2% local anesthetic.
3. Block of thorax and thoracic limb : Needle is inserted 
caudal to proximal portion of ribs to inject 0.5–2  mL of 
2% local anesthetic per site.
4. Brachial plexus block: Needle is inserted on the axial side 
of the acromion and caudoventrally progressed to touch 
the axial side of scapula. Aspiration is done, and local an-
esthetic is injected as required (1/3 of total dose).

Anesthesia and pain management in dogs and cats   Chapter | 27  415
5. Testicular block: Needle is inserted directly to testicular 
body. Aspiration is done, and local anesthetic is injected 
as required (1/2 of total recommended dose).
6. Epidurals
Anterior epidural anesthesia.
Dog: Lumbosacral space is felt on dorsal midline 
just caudal to line drawn between highest point of iliac 
crests. 2–8 mL of local anesthetic is injected slowly.
Fossa is felt on dorsomedian, and 2.5-cm-long 22G 
needle is inserted to pass fibrous in.
Cat: Lumbosacral fossa is felt on dorsomedian 
and 2.5-cm-long 22G needle is inserted to pass fi -
brous intervertebral ligament and stopped as needle 
ceased to progress. 1  mL/2.5  kg bodyweight of local 
anesthetic is used.
Commonly used local anesthetics:
● Lignocaine hydrochloride 
It is an amide-type local anesthetic agent. It is avail-
able in aqueous form from 0.5% to 5%. It is twice potent 
than procaine. Onset of action is 10 min, and duration is 
approximately 60 min (Helbo Hensen et al., 1988).
● Mepivacaine hydrochloride
It is an amide-type local anesthetic agent. It is avail-
able from 1% to 2%. It is twice potent than procaine and 
less toxic than lignocaine. Onset of action is rapid, and 
duration is longer.
● Bupivacaine hydrochloride 
It is an amide-type long-acting local anesthetic 
agent. It is highly stable. It is available in 0.25%, 0.5%, 
0.75%, and 1%. It has longer duration of action than 
others. Onset of action is 10 min.
● Procaine hydrochloride
It is an ester-type local anesthetic agent. It is avail -
able in form of 2%. It is nonirritant in action. Onset of 
action is very fast, but duration is shorter. Adrenaline is 
used to increase the duration of action. 
6 Pain management in dogs and cats
Pain management is very important in veterinary practice. 
Alleviating pain is not only a professional obligation for the 
veterinarians but also a key contributor to successful case 
outcomes as well as enhancement of the veterinarian-client-
patient relationship.
Every types of tissue damage can be generators of pain. 
Infrequently, pain may occur in the deficiency of such caus-
ative factors. Understanding the mechanisms of pain is the 
key to its successful prevention and treatment.
A good pain management leads to:
1. a practice as one that is committed to sympathetic care;
2. optimum revival from illness, injury or surgery; and
3. improved quality of life.
Types of pain:
1. Physiologic pain : It occurs after noxious stimulation. 
It is characterized by high stimulus threshold, well-  
localized, transient and presence of somatosensations. 
2. Pathologic pain: It occurs when pain is augmented and 
sustained by molecular, cellular, and microanatomic 
changes which are jointly termed peripheral and central 
hypersensitization. Pathological pain is described by 
hyperalgesia, allodynia, expansion of the painful field 
beyond its original boundaries, and pain protracted be -
yond the expected time of inflammation and healing. In 
some conditions, genomic, phenotypic alters occur that 
cause the state known as neuropathic pain, whereby 
pain can be considered a disease of the central nervous 
system.
a. Visceral pain: Pain from deep visceral structure.
b. Non-neuropathic pain : Pain produced as conse -
quence of damage to the central nervous system.
3. Clinical pain:
a. Acute pain : Acute pain has been defined as pain 
that subsists during the expected time of inflam -
mation and trauma as well as healing after injury. 
Postoperative surgical pain is this kind of pain.
b. Chronic pain: It is defined as that which subsists be-
yond the expected duration after disease process or 
injury associated with acute pain.
7 Management of pain
As it is very important for a veterinarian to give “the re -
lief of animal pain and suffering,” it is necessary to choose 
proper management of pain (Vedpathak et al., 2009). It may 
be medicinal management or nonmedicinal management 
(Glowaski, 2002).
1. Analgesic medications:
a. Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
b. Opioid pure agonists
c. Local anesthetics
d. Dissociative anesthetics
e. Alpha-2 agonists
2. Nonmedicinal management of pain:
a. Cryotherapy
b. Thermotherapy
c. Actinotherapy
d. Acupuncture
e. Low-Level Laser Therapy (LLST)
f. Transcutaneous Electrical Neuro-Stimulation (TENS)
g. Extracorporeal shock wave therapy (ESWT)
7.1 Nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs
NSAIDSs are mostly trusted to control moderate-to-  severe 
acute or chronic pain. The maximum cases that cause

416 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
pain have an inflammatory component. Nonsteroidal anti-  
inflammatory drugs (NSAIDs) are a core for management 
of chronic pain as well as for perioperative application. 
NSAIDs should be used for their central and peripheral 
effects in both canines and felines after consideration of 
hazard factors. There is no indication that any one of the 
veterinary-approved NSAIDs is connected with any greater 
or lesser occurrence or prevalence of adverse events. 
Basically, it provides analgesia by nonselective competitive 
inhibition of cyclo-oxygenase (COX-1) and COX-2 which 
reduces production of prostaglandins.
Carprofen: It is used in surgical pain at the dose rate of 
4–4.4 mg/kg by S/C, I/V , PO once/two divided dose daily 
up to 4 days.
Ketoprofen: It is used in surgical pain and chronic pain 
at the dose rate of 2 mg/kg by I/V , S/C, I/M once daily up to 
3 days and 1 mg/kg by PO once daily for 3 days.
Deracoxib: It is used in surgical pain, chronic pain, and 
dental pain at the dose rate of 3–4  mg/kg by PO once daily 
up to 7 days.
Firocoxib: It is used in surgical pain and chronic pain 
at the dose rate of 5 mg/kg by PO once daily up to 3 days.
Meloxicam: It is used in surgical pain and acute mus -
culoskeletal pain at the dose rate of 0.1  mg/kg by PO once 
daily or 4–0.2 mg/kg by S/C, I/Vly.
Robenacoxib: It is used in surgical pain and acute muscu-
loskeletal pain at the dose rate of 2 mg/kg by S/C ly once daily 
for 3 days or 1 mg/kg by PO once daily for 3 days in cats.
Etodolac: It is used in chronic pain at the dose rate of 
10–15 mg/kg by PO, S/C once daily.
7.1.1 NSAIDs for cats
Only two NSAIDs are recommended for felines: meloxi -
cam and robenacoxib. Injection form is advised while using 
meloxicam in cats, while robenacoxib can be used in cats once 
daily for 3 days after spaying, neutering, or orthopedic surgery.
7.1.2 Opioids
Opioids are the most valuable drug class for controlling 
acute pain. It plays a role in managing chronic pain also. 
Opioids can be used as a schedule drug, particularly in com-
bination with a tranquilizer or sedative (e.g., acetylproma -
zine, fentanyl, midazolam, diazepam, chlorpromazine, 
triflupromazine, etc.) when the patient’s analgesia is very 
much required. In canines, butorphanol produces limited 
somatic analgesia and very short duration of visceral or lo -
cal analgesia. Buprenorphine administered before surgery 
and throughout wound closure provided adequate analgesia 
in cats, than butorphanol. In felines, the subcutaneous route 
of opioid administration is not at all recommended. IM and 
IV routes are preferred both pre- and postoperatively in such 
patients. The oral transmucosal or buccal route of adminis-
tration for buprenorphine may also have clinical  efficacy as 
well. The individual effect of any opioid, including dura -
tion, may vary widely from patient to patient. The use of 
human commercial fentanyl patches in dogs is discouraged 
due to highly variable pharmacokinetics.
7.1.3 Local anesthetics
The choice of local anesthetics for analgesia is very much 
useful as this is the only class of drug that renders complete 
analgesia. Local anesthetics like procaine 5% have antibac-
terial activity, whereas 2% solution is bacteriostatic. The 
data in humans and animal studies reveal the predictable 
analgesic and anesthetic drug-sparing effects of local anes-
thetics also. So, local anesthetics are reported to be antimi -
crobial, immunomodulating and can diminish postoperative 
acute pain stress. They do not delay tissue healing after sur-
gery. Local anesthetics can be administered either directly 
at a simple incision site or at a specific nerve to offer anal -
gesia to a large region or area as needed. A discussion of the 
many local and regional blocks that can be utilized in dogs 
and cats is beyond the scope of these guidelines but can 
be found in several readily accessible resources, and most 
of those blocks can be readily learned by clinicians. Local 
anesthetics are considered safe than other analgesics.
7.1.4 Dissociative anesthetics
Ketamine, a dissociative anesthetic exerts significant degree 
of analgesia by blocking the phenylcyclidine site in the ion 
channel associated with N-methyl-d-aspartate (NDMA) re-
ceptor. Subanesthetic ketamine constant rate infusion (CRI) 
diminishes pain and has antihyperalgesic and antiallodynic 
effects in dogs. It is used at a dose rate of 10  mg/kg orally 
for every 8  h and 2–4  mg/kg I/Vly to control pain relief 
(Amarpal et al., 1994).
7.1.5 Alpha-2 agonists
Alpha-2 agonists like xylazine, medetomidine, etc., are ad-
ministered systematically to produce analgesia by binding 
with Alpha-2 adrenoreceptors situated in several areas like 
spinal cord and brain stem (Cullen and Reynoldson, 1993). 
Alpha-2 agonists and opioids, the two drug classes used 
together, are highly synergistic for sedation and analgesia. 
That allows low and even microdoses in combination with 
opioids to be clinically useful and minimizes the cardiovas-
cular effects. Alpha-2 agonists can produce analgesia when 
given epidurally or intrathecally also. Xylazine is used at a 
dose rate of 0.2–0.5 mg/kg I/Mly to control pain relief.
7.2 Others
1. Systemic Lidocaine
There is safety and beneficial effects of IV lidocaine 
on pain after abdominal surgery. Though IV lido -
caine is anesthetic sparing in dogs and cats, it exerts a

Anesthesia and pain management in dogs and cats   Chapter | 27  417
 pain-modifying effect in those species. The use of IV 
lidocaine in cats is contraindicated due to negative car -
diovascular effects, but successful use in clinical prac -
tice has been anecdotally reported.
2. Gabapentin
Gabapentin is an anticonvulsant with analgesic prop -
erties. Because of its efficiency and acceptability, ga -
bapentin is widely used with neuropathic and other 
maladaptive pain conditions. Using gabapentin in dogs 
and cats in DJD, chronic musculoskeletal pain is en -
couraging. It is used at a dose rate of 3–10 mg/kg orally 
for every 24 h.
3. Amantadine
Amantadine is in class of medications called adaman -
tanes. It exerts a pain-modifying effect as an N-methyl-
d-aspartate (NDMA) receptor antagonist and remains a 
drug of interest for chronic pain. Though it is not spe -
cifically for DJD, it is an adjunct to NSAIDs in dogs. It 
is used at a dose rate of 1–4 mg/kg orally for every 24 h.
4. Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs)
TCAs are the most useful medications for selective neu-
ropathic pain circumstances. In dogs, it is used for neu -
ropathic musculoskeletal pain.
5. Acetaminophen
Acetaminophen is contraindicated in cats. In dogs, it re-
vealed a pain-modifying effect in orthopedic surgery. It 
is used at a dose rate of 10–15 mg/kg orally for every 8 h.
6. Prednisolone
It is not currently used with NSAIDs. In case of pain as-
sociated with tumor and cancer associated with inflam -
mation, it is useful. It is used at a dose rate of 0.2–1 mg/
kg orally for every 12–24  h. Further tapering of initial 
dose is advised.
8 Pain management by some alternative 
solutions
Luckily, there are many other methods for dogs and cats 
which can help manage pain and extend quality of life.
8.1 Physical rehabilitation
Physical therapy is a therapy often used to help patients to 
recover from surgery or restore tissue function after an in -
jury. Similarly, there are many modalities used in animal 
physical rehabilitation that help reduce pain and inflamma-
tion to improve a pet’s comfort.
8.2 Thermal therapy
Heat and cryotherapy are such therapies which are fre -
quently used to recover circulation or reduce inflammation 
and swelling. Ice is added after surgical measures to help 
decrease pain and swelling, whereas heat can be added to 
sore muscles or stiff joints to provide circulation to the tis -
sues and joints.
8.3 Laser therapy
Laser therapy, also termed to as low-level light therapy 
or photobiomodulation, utilizes light to stimulate specific 
cells to decrease inflammation and pain connected with in -
flammation. The laser can also assist to restore damaged 
tissue by restoring function. Laser is frequently used on 
pets arthritis cases, malignant tumor patients, soft tissue 
injuries, or recovering from surgical procedures. Pets with 
neurologic diseases like intervertebral disk disease (IVDD), 
degenerative myelopathy, or DJD get benefit from laser to 
help regenerate nerve function.
8.4 Extracorporeal shockwave therapy
It employs high-energy sound waves which stimulate the 
tissue and causes a physiologic benefit. This leads to en -
dorphin release for pain management and encourages tissue 
healing. It can be successfully used for pets suffering from 
arthritis, muscle and tendon injuries, or irreparable bone 
fractures.
8.5 Therapeutic ultrasound
Therapeutic ultrasound is a device that uses low-energy 
sound waves to warm up the tissue for improving flexibility 
and promoting healing while decreasing pain and inflam -
mation. It is often used for pets with soft tissue trauma such 
as muscle and tendon strains or sprains.
8.6 Electrotherapy
TENS or transcutaneous electrical nerve stimulation is a 
form of electrotherapy that is used to treat inflammation and 
acute pain. The therapy uses small electrodes that are placed 
directly on the skin over the trigger point. So it uses an elec-
trical current that is applied to a painful area to inhibit the 
sensory response to pain. Electrical stimulation can help in 
cases involving arthritis, postsurgical recovery or soft tis -
sue injuries or trauma. It helps the muscles strengthen or 
heal faster, it improves the variety of motion for the affected 
joint, it helps prevent muscle atrophy, and it helps prevent 
osteoporosis after surgery.
8.7 Pulsed electromagnetic field therapy
Pulsed electromagnetic field therapy improves the qual -
ity of life for older dogs, dogs with chronic pain and even 
young, fit dogs. Osteoarthritis is one of the most frequent 
health problems in older dogs, and many large dog breeds 
develop hip dysplasia over time. Dogs with these chronic

418 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
conditions can really benefit from pulsed electromagnetic 
field therapy. Both arthritis and hip dysplasia have been suc-
cessfully treated using PEMF for dogs. It is also used in 
arthritis, wounds, soft tissue trauma, neurologic conditions 
and postsurgical management.
8.8 Acupuncture
Acupuncture is a system that uses small needles inserted 
into specific points on the body, which cause a physiologic 
response. Dogs with arthritis, digestive problems, kid -
ney disease, hip dysplasia, epilepsy, asthma, and certain 
neurological disorders can get benefit from acupuncture. 
Acupuncture also stimulates nerves, which is beneficial 
for pets suffering from IVDD or degenerative myelopathy. 
Other pets that benefit from acupuncture are those with ar -
thritis or soft tissue injuries.
8.9 Therapeutic exercise
Therapeutic exercise is used in animal rehabilitation to help 
strengthen the weakened muscles associated with an injury 
or postoperative recovery. Arthritis causes pain in the joints 
leading to weakness in the muscles. Therapeutic exercises 
help improve strength and mobility in arthritic pets, and 
pets recovering from surgery or injury.
8.10 Hydrotherapy
Hydrotherapy uses water to help rehabilitate injuries of dog 
and to also relieve pain. It’s especially helpful for dogs who 
have conditions such as a torn ACL, hip dysplasia, degen -
erative joint disease, arthritis, or dogs who have been para-
lyzed or lost a limb. Hydrotherapy uses buoyancy, resistance, 
viscosity, and hydrostatic pressure to assist a dog move the 
injured joints they are trying to rehabilitate. Swimming in 
warm circulating water or walking on an underwater tread-
mill provides buoyancy while reducing pain on injured joints.
8.11 Massage
Massage and manual therapies are used to alleviate taut 
muscles and augment circulation to the tissues. Massage 
brings blood flow to the tissue, providing oxygen and nu -
trients to the area. It can reduce pain by decreasing mus -
cle spasms as well as improving the flexibility of joints. 
Massage can also decrease stress and anxiety.

Anesthesia and pain management in dogs and cats   Chapter | 27  419

421

Chapter 28
Drugs in therapeutic application of dogs 
and cats
1 Introduction
Animals have played a significant role in the lives of humans 
throughout history. Primitive people discovered that the rela-
tionship between humans and animals is very essential for the 
survival of both, and keeping pets was a common practice in 
hunter-gathering societies. The domestication of animals be-
gan over 12,000 years ago and continues as animals and hu-
mans coexist, interact, and influence each other (Jorgenson, 
1997). Dogs and cats are companion animals and people keep 
them as their pets. The term pet is defined as an animal kept 
for pleasure rather than utility. It is a natural phenomenon that 
animals become ill as human beings and require certain types 
of medications. The therapeutic use of drugs can limit and 
ultimately cure the disease. There are many classes of drugs 
that are used in companion animals for the treatment of vari-
ous kinds of diseases (Wayne et al., 2011).
A chemical substance used for treatment, therapy, pre -
vention, cure, mitigation, or diagnosis of various diseases 
that have understood biological effects on the body of ani -
mals or humans is termed a drug. The use of drugs is for a 
limited duration or can be used for a prolonged period as in 
the case of chronic diseases. These are generally taken to 
mitigate the symptoms of sickness or used for a prophylactic 
purpose (Karaman, 2015). The positive biological action of 
a drug is produced when it interacts with the physiological 
processes undergoing the body of animals which may be 
normal or abnormal. The purpose of drug administration is 
to treat diseases that may be of infectious origin, or noninfec-
tious origin, or to alleviate pain, anesthesia, and pregnancy 
prevention (Wayne et al., 2011). The abnormal pathophysi-
ological conditions affecting the part or whole body of ani-
mals are defined as a disease associated with certain types of 
signs and symptoms, which may be clinical and subclinical, 
and to laboratory findings (Karaman, 2015).
There are different ways to classify therapeutic agents 
and classes namely based on their chemical structure, how it 
interacts with the pathophysiological conditions, their mode 
of action, or the source from which these are obtained (Lees 
et al., 1991). There are many classes of drugs used in dogs 
and cats to treat various infections caused by pathogens in-
cluding parasites. The therapeutic application of drugs is 
essential because it is the amount of dose that determines 
toxicity or therapy (Karaman, 2015).
2 Therapeutic applications of drugs
The effect of drugs depends upon their absorption into the 
body of the animals. The different methods for introduc -
ing drugs into the body have important implications for the 
effect of drugs, the risk of dependence, and health risks. 
The same dose of drugs has varying absorption rates for 
different routes of administration and has different meta -
bolic rates depending on the site of absorption (Strang et al., 
1998). The routes by which drugs are administered have an 
impact on their bioavailability and their pharmacological 
potency. Each route is also associated with complications 
distinct from its pharmacological effects. The most com -
mon routes include the enteral route (involving the gastro -
intestinal tract of the animals), the parenteral route (other 
than GIT such as intravenous, intramuscular, and intraperi-
toneal), inhalation, and topical (Lees et al., 1991). Drugs are 
formulated according to the route of administration, namely 
tablets, injections, creams, lotions, drops, and nebulizers. 
Every route has some advantages and disadvantages over 
the other route and affects the bioavailability of the admin-
istered drug (Strang et al., 1998).
2.1 Challenges and benefits of different routes 
of drug administration
(i) Oral route (enteral route) is the natural route of drug ad-
ministration that is the most convenient, cheapest, and most 
used route. Its advantages include the onset of the action

422 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
of the drug being slow, but the effect is more prolonged, 
and the drug is absorbed well, easily, and safely to admin -
ister drugs through this route ( Strang et al., 1998 ). While 
the disadvantages include the destruction of the drugs by 
the digestive enzymes, the drug may be an irritant to the 
gastric mucosa and not absorbed well, and not being practi-
cal in unconscious and uncooperative animals such as dogs 
and cats. (ii) Rectal administration of drugs (suppositories 
or enema) bypasses the liver and reduces the first pass ef -
fect. It is also useful in unconscious animals. (iii) Vaginal 
and urethral administration of drugs mostly have local ef -
fects (Lees et al., 1991). (iv) Topical administration of drugs 
(ointments, creams, pastes, and lotions) is slowly absorbed 
through the skin via sebaceous glands. These are for local 
effect and may irritate the animals. (v) Parenteral route (ad-
ministration of drugs via injections) has a rapid onset of 
action, easy to administer, and has no degradation of drugs 
by the digestive enzymes. Its drawback is that there is no 
reversal of the wrong drug administered by this route, and 
the bioavailability of the drug is 100%. Irritant drugs can 
be given by intravenous injections ( Lippert et  al., 1993 ). 
The intramuscular route is also an important parenteral 
route of drug administration that is employed commonly. 
Absorption of the drug through this route is uniform. Its 
disadvantage is pain at the injection site for certain drugs. 
Through the subcutaneous route, nonirritant drugs are ad -
ministered. Absorption of the drug is slow but uniform as 
in the case of I.M. injection. Some other routes used for 
the administration of injection in small animals include epi-
dural, intrathecal, intradermic, and subconjunctival injec -
tion (Karaman, 2015).
3 Drugs used for the treatment of 
diseases in dogs and cats
Antimicrobial drugs are used to prevent and treat infections 
caused by bacteria and to improve the well-being of ani -
mals. These medicines are the most effective agents avail -
able in current modern medicine. However, the availability 
and misuse of drugs lead to the development of resistance 
and bacterial susceptibility is decreased with time. The sus-
ceptibility of microorganisms is different for different drugs. 
The mode of resistance can be either intrinsic or acquired 
through different means of genetics. Drugs are also used to 
treat infections caused by microorganisms such as parasites 
(Ghubash, 2006). One of the most common reasons for the 
owners of dogs and cats to seek veterinary hospitals is pain. 
Pain is defined as an emotional and unpleasant experience 
associated with potential or actual tissue damage. There are 
many drugs available on the market to treat pain. The most 
common pain killers are steroidal and nonsteroidal anti-
inflammatory drugs such as dexamethasone, prednisolone, 
flunixin meglumine, meloxicam, piroxicam, etc. ( Mclean, 
2018). However, in cats, only meloxicam is the Food and 
Drug Development Authority (FDA)-approved drug used 
for the treatment of pain. Many steroidal and nonsteroidal 
drugs are contraindicated in cats. Therefore, the correct 
use of these drugs is very important in the feline family 
(Morley et al., 2005 ). Following are the different types of 
drugs discussed below against different pathogenic organ -
isms (Table 1).
3.1 Use of antibiotics
The most active therapeutic agents among drugs are anti -
biotics. The therapeutic effects of antibiotics are due to the 
suppression and limitation of the growth of bacteria. The 
use of antibiotics in animals helped in the therapy of dis -
eases and has a role in lowering the number of morbidity 
and mortality. In animals, antibiotics interact in different 
ways to stop the growth of bacteria ( Weese et  al., 2011). 
The mode of action of antibiotics includes (i) inhibiting the 
synthesis of the bacterial cell wall (e.g., β-lactam and van-
comycin antibiotics), (ii) inhibiting the synthesis of protein 
(e.g., tetracycline, chloramphenicol, aminoglycoside, and 
macrolides), and (iii) inhibiting the synthesis of DNA (e.g., 
sulfonamide and fluoroquinolones) (Karaman, 2015).
Many antibiotics are considered safe, but side effects 
can occur with the administration of any antibiotics, and in 
some cases, can lead to life-threatening conditions. The use 
of improper drugs in the therapy and treatment of sick dogs 
and cats can lead to failure of the treatment such as failure to 
mitigate infection, public health issues (development of an-
timicrobial resistance), regulatory (antimicrobial use), and 
economic (repeated and prolonged treatment is required) 
concerns (Weese et al., 2011). Therefore, proper administra-
tion of drugs is very essential to prevent the development of 
drug resistance. Antibiotic resistance is increasing in devel-
oping countries because of its misuse. The microorganisms 
mutate to develop the structure and bypass the effects of an-
tibiotics so that they can survive within the host. Some ex -
amples of antibiotic resistance include methicillin-resistant  
Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA), penicillin-resistant 
Enterococcus, and multidrug-resistant Mycobacterium tu -
berculosis (MDR-TB) (Prescott et al., 2002).
Many antibiotics are contraindicated in cats such as 
aminoglycoside (gentamycin, vancomycin, streptomycin, 
kanamycin, tobramycin, etc.) These drugs interact with the 
normal physiology of cats and cause toxicity. Cats lack an 
enzyme named glucuronyl transferase which is important 
for glucuronidation (Luiz and Heseltine, 2008 ). Therefore, 
the reaction may be up to a hundred times slower in cats 
than in other animals. In other species, drugs that are ex -
creted as a conjugate of glucuronide include aspirin, ben -
zoic acids, acetaminophen, and hexachlorophene. These 
drugs have a prolonged half-life in cats as compared to their 
half-life in other species. Other contraindicated drugs in cats 
include opiate derivatives (e.g., morphine),  tetracycline,

Drugs in therapeutic application of dogs and cats  Chapter | 28  423
TABLE 1 List of some commonly used drugs in dogs and cats.
Drug Dose Mode of action Function/indication Reference
Antibiotics
Amoxicillin 11–15 mg/kg PO Inhibition of cell wall biosynthesis First-line option for UTIs 
(urinary tract infections), 
ineffective against beta-
lactamase-producing 
bacteria, antibiotic
Weese et al. 
(2011)
Ceftiofur 2 mg/kg SC Inhibition of cell wall biosynthesis Enterococci are resistant, 
Antibiotic
Karaman (2015)
Ciprofloxacin 30 mg/kg PO Inhibit DNA replication by inhibiting 
bacterial DNA topoisomerase and 
DNA gyrase
Antibiotic Weese et al. 
(2011)
Enrofloxacin 5 mg/kg PO (cat)
10–20 mg/kg (Dog)
Inhibit DNA gyrase, thus inhibiting 
the synthesis of both DNA and RNA
Limited efficacy against 
Enterococci, antibiotic
Weese et al. 
(2011)
Cephalexin 12–25 mg/kg PO Inhibition of cell wall biosynthesis Enterococci are resistant, 
antibiotic
Karaman (2015)
Chloramphenicol Dog: 40–50 mg/kg PO
Cat: 12.5–20 mg/kg PO
Inhibit bacterial protein synthesis Reserved for multidrug-
resistant infections, 
antibiotic
Karaman (2015)
Antiviral drugs
Acyclovir 12.5 mg/cat Interfere with viral DNA synthesis, 
guanosine analog
FHV-1 infections Pozzo et al. 
(2014)
Penciclovir 12.5 mg/cat Interfere with viral DNA synthesis, 
guanosine analog
FHV-1 infections Sykes and Papich 
(2013)
Trifluridine 1% solution Interfere with viral DNA synthesis, a 
fluorinated thymidine analog
Topical treatment of 
FHV-1 keratitis
Pozzo et al. 
(2014)
Zidovudine 5–15 mg/cat Interfere with viral DNA synthesis, a 
thymidine analog
Systemic treatment of 
FIV and FeLV infections
Sykes and Papich 
(2013)
Antiparasitic drugs
Amitraz 0.025% solution  Miticidal Ghubash (2006)
Ivermectin 0.4–0.6 mg/kg Interfere with GABA Antiparasitic Ghubash (2006)
Imidocarb 
dipropionate
6.6 mg/kg IM, SC Interfere with the production of 
polyamines
Antiprotozoal Dubey (1992)
Metronidazole 2.5–12.5 mg/kg PO Interfere with the production of 
polyamines
Antiprotozoal Matos et al. 
(2015)
Febantel 15 mg/kg PO Block the whole energy management 
mechanism of the worms that are 
paralyzed and died
Anthelmintic  
Albendazole 12.5–30.6 mg/kg PO Causes degenerative alterations in 
the intestinal cells of the worm by 
binding to the colchicine-sensitive 
site of β-tubulin
Anthelmintic  
Levamisole 7.5 mg/kg PO Acetylcholine inhibitor Anthelmintic  
Antifungal drugs
Ketoconazole 5–10 mg/kg PO Prevent the synthesis of ergosterol Mycotic infection, 
dermatitis, third-line 
treatment of systemic 
mycosis
Foy and Trepanier 
(2010)
Continued

424 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 chloramphenicol, antifungal drugs such as ketoconazole 
and griseofulvin, organophosphates, and insulin ( Luiz and 
Heseltine, 2008).
3.2 Antiviral treatment
Viruses are obligate intracellular pathogens that can mul -
tiply within the host by using the biochemical machinery 
of the victim cell during replication. Antiviral drugs inter -
fere with the events of viruses such as during replication, 
including attachment, uncoating, assembly, and synthesis 
of macromolecules directed by viruses (Pozzo et al., 2014). 
Antiviral drugs are not commonly used in animals includ -
ing humans as compared to antibiotics. For the development 
of antiviral drugs, the recognition of specific targets of vi -
ruses is essential with lower or no side effects. Currently 
in veterinary medicine, only one antiviral drug is licensed 
for use in animals, namely feline interferon-omega (which 
works by stimulating the host immune system against vi -
ruses). However, many antiviral drugs licensed for humans 
are also used in animals, e.g., trifluridine, idoxuridine, and 
acyclovir, for members of the feline family suffering from 
an ocular infection caused by feline herpesvirus 1 or zid -
ovudine for the treatment of feline immunodeficiency virus 
(Sykes and Papich, 2013).
Feline herpesvirus 1 is responsible for acute ocular 
disease in cats. Despite a large number of antiviral drugs 
available on the market, only a few drugs are used for the 
treatment of viral infections in cats only. Ganciclovir, penci-
clovir, and acyclovir are acyclic nucleoside analogs and act 
as competitive inhibitors of deoxynucleoside triphosphate. 
The ophthalmic ointment of 0.5% acyclovir is effective for 
the treatment of ocular infections in felids. The oral admin-
istration of synthetic antiviral compounds, namely amino 
acid l-lysine as a diet is safe in the therapy of ocular infec-
tions in cats ( Barabas et al., 2008 ). Feline retrovirus such 
as feline leukemia virus can be treated with the administra-
tion of immunomodulators. The first antiretrovirus used in 
animals is zidovudine (an analog of nucleoside that inhibits 
reverse transcriptase). In canines, the use of topical prepara-
tions of idoxuridine and trifluridine has been also reported. 
The canine parvovirus is a lethal virus that infects puppies. 
Currently, no specific treatment for this infection is avail -
able; only symptomatic therapy is given to the infected ani-
mals (Pozzo et al., 2014).
3.3 Antiparasitic drugs
Parasites are the common cause of GIT, circulatory system, 
and dermatological diseases in dogs and cats. Parasites pre-
fer to live on the skin of pets including their shelters. The 
houses where the owners kept their animals are the most 
neglected space where endoparasites and ectoparasites 
grow and molt to become infective stage parasites. These 
parasites can be spread from animals to humans which live 
in proximity to dogs and cats. These animals act as a res -
ervoir of many pathogens that are zoonotically important 
and are a threat to public health ( Curtis and Curtis, 1998 ). 
Therefore, the prevention, control, and treatment of para -
sitic infections and infestations are very important. Canine 
demodicosis is caused by demodicid mites and is a disease 
of the skin characterized by alopecia, erythema, popular 
and pustular dermatitis of the skin of canines, and folliculi-
tis due to secondary bacterial infections. The symptomatic 
Drug Dose Mode of action Function/indication Reference
Fluconazole 10 mg/kg PO Works by altering the fungal cell 
membrane
Candidiasis, 
cryptococcosis, systemic 
mycosis with CNS or 
ocular involvement
Foy and Trepanier 
(2010)
Itraconazole 5–10 mg/kg PO Acts by inhibiting the fungal 
cytochrome P-450-dependent 
enzyme lanosterol 14α-demethylase
Systemic mycosis that 
does not involve CNS
Foy and Trepanier 
(2010)
Voriconazole 4–6 mg/kg PO Acts by inhibiting the fungal 
cytochrome P-450-dependent 
enzyme lanosterol 14α-demethylase
Invasive aspergillosis Rochette et al. 
(2003)
Clotrimazole 1% solution Acts by damaging the permeability 
barrier in the fungal cytoplasmic 
membrane
Sinonasal aspergillosis, 
malassezia otitis
Rochette et al. 
(2003)
Posaconazole 6 mg/kg PO Inhibit the ergosterol production by 
binding and inhibiting the lanosterol 
14α-demethylase
Candidiasis, 
cryptococcosis, 
aspergillosis
Rochette et al. 
(2003)
TABLE 1 List of some commonly used drugs in dogs and cats—cont’d

Drugs in therapeutic application of dogs and cats  Chapter | 28  425
treatment of demodicosis includes miticidal drugs such as 
topical rotenone or benzoyl peroxide shampoos. Amitraz is 
FDA-approved drug used against mites. This drug belongs 
to the family of formamidine and is a broad-spectrum miti-
cide. This agent is the inhibitor of monoamine oxidase and 
prostaglandin synthesis (Ghubash, 2006).
Endoparasites such as nematodes, trematodes, and ces -
todes (hookworms, heartworms, etc.) are very prevalent in 
pets. The subclinical infection of these parasites can lead to 
severe anemia and ultimately dogs and cats become weak, 
dull, emaciated, and have a rough coat. These endoparasites 
feed on the content of GIT and the blood of the host. The 
blood-sucking parasites cause the animal to become anemic 
and suck a huge volume of blood on daily basis. Their mode 
of transmission is mostly through the fecal-oral route and 
requires an intermediate host to reach their infective stage. 
Dirofilariasis is a parasitic disease that affects the lungs and 
hearts of animals. Other endoparasitic diseases of dogs and 
cats include leishmaniasis, toxocariasis, and ancylostomia -
sis. These parasites can be controlled through the proper 
administration of anthelmintic drugs on a monthly basis. 
Some anthelmintic drugs include levamisole, oxfendazole, 
and albendazole.
Protozoal are the microscopic eukaryotes that are also 
responsible for the various parasitic diseases in dogs and 
cats. Some zoonotically important protozoal diseases in 
dogs and cats are toxoplasmosis (which causes abortion 
in human beings), giardiasis, babesiosis, hepatozoono -
sis, and neosporosis ( Matos et  al., 2015 ). The therapeu -
tic approach to treat these disorders is the administration 
of antiprotozoal drugs such as metronidazole, imidocarb, 
and diminazene aceturate through intramuscular injection 
(Dubey, 1992). Ivermectin is an antibiotic that also acts as 
an antiparasitic drug. It belongs to the family avermectin. Its 
mode of action is through the release and effect of GABA 
(gamma- aminobutyric acid [the peripheral neurotransmit -
ter of several parasites]). This neurotransmitter is limited 
to central nervous systems in mammals, therefore, has a 
wide margin of safety with an intact blood–brain barrier 
(Ghubash, 2006).
3.4 Antifungal drugs
Animals that are immunocompromised are at risk of fun -
gal infection. Fungi can cause severe dermatological and 
internal problems in dogs and cats. Many fungi are zoo -
notic and can spread from pets to human beings due to their 
close association with companion animals. People can ac -
quire a ringworm infection from cats. However, in the last 
two decades, the number of antifungal drug development is 
increased tremendously. The first and second generations 
of triazole drugs are developed against fungal infections 
(Rochette et al., 2003). Currently, the use of these new drugs 
is limited in veterinary practice because of their high cost. 
The number of antifungal agents available in the market is 
increased, but for the treatment of mycoses in dogs and cats, 
only a limited number of drugs are used. Amphotericin B 
is an antibiotic originally extracted from Streptococcus no-
dosus. Ergosterol is a constituent of the cell membrane of 
fungi. This drug makes micelles with fungal ergosterol and 
alters cell permeability. Its effective treatment requires intra-
venous administration because of poor absorption from the 
gastrointestinal tract. This drug is nephrotoxic, and its cause 
is not completely understood (Foy and Trepanier, 2010).
Ketoconazole (azole) is another antifungal drug used 
in animals for the treatment of fungal infections. Azoles 
are classified into imidazole or triazoles depending on the 
number of nitrogen molecules present within the azole 
ring. Triazole is used for the treatment of systemic in -
fections while imidazole is used as a topical. These are 
proven effective against mycoses. There are several other 
azole drugs available on the market such as itraconazole, 
fluconazole, clotrimazole, and voriconazole ( Rochette 
et al., 2003 ). Their mode of action is to inhibit lanosterol 
14-alpha demethylase, leading to the depletion of ergos -
terol. The noncentral nervous system infectious which is 
not life-threatening and caused by Blastomyces derma -
titidis, Histoplasma capsulatum , and Coccidioides immi -
tis can be treated with the azole group of drugs ( Foy and 
Trepanier, 2010).
Dermatophytosis is the most common condition caused 
by Microsporum canis, M. gypsium, and Trichophyton men-
tagrophytes. These fungi cause little health hazards in dogs 
and cats but are zoonotically important. Aspergillus fumiga-
tus and other Aspergillus species are responsible for canine 
nasal aspergillosis which is a local infection of the sinuses 
and nasal cavities. In dogs, dermatophytosis is treated with 
topical preparation while cats require systemic treatment 
protocol (Rochette et al., 2003).
3.5 Immunosuppressive drug therapies  
for dogs and cats
The immune system of the organisms protects them from 
foreign pathogens and other insults from the external en -
vironment. It comprises complex interactions between the 
immune cells of the animals and the invaders. The body’s 
immune system consists of innate and adaptive immune 
systems. The dysregulation of either the innate or adap -
tive system alone or both will result in autoimmune dis -
eases (Sykes and Papich, 2013). The causes of autoimmune 
disease include genetic factors or environmental triggers 
such as pathogens, drugs, vaccines, neoplasia, etc. Local 
or systemic inflammatory responses occur due to improper 
stimulation of the immune system that may lead to tissue 
destruction and other clinical illnesses. The most com -
mon systemic diseases in dogs and cats which have au -
toimmune causes include immune-mediated hemolytic

426 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
anemia,  immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, protein-
losing  inflammatory bowel disease, feline asthma, and  
immune-mediated polyarthritis (Viviano, 2013).
The new therapies are adapted in the veterinary prac -
tice from human medicine, and the treatment of immuno -
modulatory diseases in companion animals continues to 
evolve. Immunosuppressive drugs are used to treat auto -
immune diseases and in the management of organ trans -
plantation. The objective of the treatment is to induce 
remission of the diseases through the modulation of func -
tions of lymphocytes and inhibition of inflammation. The 
most used immunosuppressive drugs are glucocorticoids, 
cyclosporine, chlorambucil, vincristine, azathioprine, my -
cophenolate, and leflunomide ( Lees et al., 1991 ). In vet -
erinary medicine, adjunctive immunomodulatory therapy 
includes the use of human immunoglobulin and vincristine 
for the management of acute immunomodulatory diseases. 
The advantage of this therapy is that they are used initially 
for the stabilization of diseases due to its potential for a 
faster therapeutic response as well as low adverse effects 
(Viviano, 2013).
3.6 Supportive drugs used in dogs and cats
The morbidity and mortality of critically ill small animal 
patients may be reduced with nutritional support. The provi-
sion of nutrients to small animals through the enteral route is 
easy, simple, convenient, inexpensive, and physiologically 
sound. However, the condition of some animals doesn’t let 
them assimilate nutrients from the GIT temporarily. The ad-
ministration of all essential nutrients intravenously (IV) is 
termed total parenteral nutrients. It is indicated for the nutri-
tional support of critically ill patients with GIT dysfunction. 
It can be a beneficial mode of treatment for animals suffer-
ing from GIT diseases and cannot be nourished by enteral 
means (Lippert et al., 1993).
Fluid therapy is a common practice in veterinary 
medicine to correct electrolyte imbalance, dehydration, 
 hypoperfusion, and hypovolemia, to maintain osmotic 
pressure, and intravascular volume. The selection of the 
fluid for the given situation requires an understanding of 
body fluids physiology. Dehydration in dogs and cats can 
be detected by carefully taking the history of the animals 
related to fluid intake, vomiting, and diarrhea and by ex -
amining the elasticity and texture of the skin ( KuKanich, 
2013). Other ways to detect dehydration include examin -
ing the mucous membrane appearance and determining 
the packed cell volume of the organism. Urine analysis 
can also provide us with huge information about the acid–
base status of the animals including electrolyte and fluid 
status. Fluid therapy is given in three categories, viz. re -
placement, maintenance, and continuous fluid replace -
ment. The common fluids include ringer lactate, dextrose, 
and normal saline. Normal saline is indicated if the cat or 
dog is suffering from vomiting and diarrhea ( Pozzo et al., 
2014).
Fluid therapy can be administered to correct the dehy -
dration status of the animals and to maintain the concentra-
tion of salts inside the body of the affected dogs and cats. 
Seizures and tetany may lead to hypoglycemia and require 
a treatment that supplements the missing amount of calcium 
in the body. For this purpose, 10% calcium gluconate is rec-
ommended. If there is asymptomatic hypocalcemia, then 
calcium gluconate is not recommended because the precipi-
tation of calcium oxalate in the tissue may increase with it 
(Luiz and Heseltine, 2008).
Supportive therapy is also given to those dogs and cats 
who are suffered from intoxication. The most common 
toxic agent includes anticoagulant rodenticides, chocolates, 
ethylene glycol, metaldehyde, and marijuana. The decon -
taminated strategies for orally ingested toxins include in -
duction of emesis (by hydrogen peroxide), fluid therapy, 
administration of charcoal, gastric lavage, and antidote ad -
ministration for specific toxic agents. For example, N-acetyl 
cysteine is an antidote for paracetamol poisoning in cats 
(Lippert et al., 1993) (Fig. 1).
FIG. 1 Therapeutic application of drugs in dogs and cats.

Drugs in therapeutic application of dogs and cats  Chapter | 28  427
4 Conclusion
Antimicrobial drugs are used to stop the growth of bacteria 
that cause diseases in animals. The therapeutic effect of med-
icine depends on the dose rate of the drug administered and 
the route of drug administration. In dogs and cats, the paren-
teral route is the commonly used route for the administration 
of drugs because these animals are uncooperative with the 
treatment. There are many preparations of drugs available in 
the market used against a wide range of pathogenic organ -
isms that cause diseases. However, in veterinary medicine, 
only a limited number of formulations of drugs are approved, 
and veterinarians mostly use those drugs formulated for hu-
man beings in cats and dogs. In cats, certain drugs are contra-
indicated and cannot be used because of toxicity, while dogs 
have a huge margin of safety. In veterinary medicine, antivi-
ral drugs are only used in cats, and no specific antiviral drug 
is available that is formulated for use in dogs.
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank all other coauthors for providing guidance 
and support.

429

Chapter 29
Nutritional and metabolic diseases  
of dogs and cats
1 Overview of nutritional and 
metabolic diseases in dogs and cats
Nutritional and metabolic diseases in dogs and cats refer to a 
group of disorders that result from imbalances in the intake or 
utilization of nutrients. These diseases can have a significant 
impact on the health and welfare of pets and can be caused 
by a variety of factors, including genetics, diet, and lifestyle.
1.1 Epidemiology and prevalence
Nutritional and metabolic diseases pose a substantial con -
cern for both dogs and cats, albeit some diseases are more 
widespread in one species than others. Obesity is the most 
frequently encountered nutritional disease in dogs, with a 
staggering 30%–60% of dogs in the United States estimated 
to be afflicted (Lund et al., 2016). Likewise, obesity is a criti-
cal issue in cats, with estimates indicating that 25%–50% of 
felines are either overweight or obese (Scarlett et al., 1994). 
In addition to obesity, both species are susceptible to an array 
of other common nutritional and metabolic diseases, includ-
ing diabetes, pancreatitis, liver disease, kidney disease, and 
various forms of malnutrition. The prevalence of these dis-
eases can vary significantly based on a multitude of factors, 
including breed, age, and dietary composition. Consequently, 
it is vital to recognize the underlying determinants of these 
diseases to accurately diagnose and treat affected animals, as 
well as implementing appropriate measures for prevention.
1.2 Common nutritional and metabolic diseases 
in dogs and cats
1.2.1 Obesity
Obesity is an increasing problem in both dogs and cats, 
with studies indicating that up to 50% of dogs and cats are 
overweight or obese. Obesity is linked to a range of health 
problems in both species, including diabetes, heart disease, 
joint problems, and decreased life expectancy.
Causes of obesity
Obesity in dogs and cats is primarily caused by an imbal -
ance between energy intake and energy expenditure. In 
other words, animals consume more calories than they burn 
through activity and metabolic processes. Several factors 
contribute to this imbalance, including genetics, diet, and 
lifestyle. Genetics play a role in determining an animal’s 
body weight and propensity to gain weight. Certain breeds 
of dogs, such as Labradors, are more likely to become obese 
than others, even when fed the same diet and given the same 
level of exercise. Studies have identified genetic variations 
in several genes involved in energy metabolism that may 
predispose dogs to obesity. Diet is a significant contribu -
tor to obesity in dogs and cats. The quality, quantity, and 
frequency of food intake all play a role in energy balance. 
High-fat diets, high-carbohydrate diets, and free-choice 
feeding (allowing animals to eat as much as they want) have 
all been linked to obesity in both species. Lifestyle factors, 
such as lack of exercise, also contribute to obesity in dogs 
and cats. Animals that are sedentary or live-in environments 
with limited opportunities for physical activity are more 
likely to become overweight or obese. Obesity has signifi -
cant health consequences for both dogs and cats shown in 
Fig. 1. In addition to reducing life expectancy, obesity in -
creases the risk of a range of health problems, including:
1. Diabetes: Obese animals are at a higher risk of develop-
ing diabetes, which can lead to a range of complications, 
including blindness, kidney failure, and nerve damage.
2. Cardiovascular disease: Obesity increases the risk of 
heart disease and hypertension, which can lead to heart 
failure, stroke, and other cardiovascular problems.
3. Joint problems: Excess weight puts extra stress on the 
joints, leading to arthritis and other joint problems.

430 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
4. Respiratory problems: Obese animals are at a higher 
risk of respiratory problems, including asthma and other 
breathing difficulties.
5. Reduced immune function: Obesity can impair immune 
function, making animals more susceptible to infections 
and other health problems.
Management of obesity
The management of obesity in dogs and cats involves a 
range of strategies, including dietary modifications, exer -
cise, and behavioral interventions. Dietary modifications 
involve reducing calorie intake while maintaining nutrient 
balance. Commercial weight loss diets for dogs and cats 
are available that provide reduced calorie intake while en -
suring adequate nutrient intake. These diets are often high 
in protein and fiber, which can help promote satiety and 
reduce hunger. Exercise is also an essential component of 
managing obesity in dogs and cats. Regular exercise can 
help burn excess calories and improve metabolic function. 
However, exercise must be tailored to the animal’s individ-
ual needs and abilities to prevent injury and ensure success. 
Behavioral interventions, such as modifying feeding habits 
and reducing food rewards, can also be effective in manag-
ing obesity in dogs and cats. These interventions focus on 
changing the animal’s behavior and relationship with food, 
rather than simply reducing calorie intake.
Recent scientific findings
Cutting-edge research has revealed new insights into the 
origins and ramifications of obesity in both dogs and cats. 
For instance, a recent study discovered that obesity in cats 
is associated with modifications in the gut microbiome, 
which may contribute to metabolic dysfunction and insulin 
resistance (Li et al., 2020). The study suggests that targeted 
dietary interventions, such as the use of prebiotics and pro-
biotics, may help enhance the gut microbiome and mitigate 
the risk of obesity-related metabolic dysfunction. Similarly, 
a recent study evaluated the efficacy of a weight loss pro -
gram for overweight dogs and found that a combination of a 
high-protein, high-fiber diet and increased physical activity 
was successful in inducing weight loss and improving meta-
bolic function ( German et al., 2018 ). The study also high -
lighted the potential benefits of personalized weight loss 
FIG. 1 Common consequences of obesity in dogs and cats.

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  431
plans over standardized approaches. Additionally, a recent 
literature review revealed that the utilization of noninvasive 
technologies such as activity trackers and body condition 
scoring systems can be helpful in managing obesity in dogs 
and cats (German et al., 2018). These innovative technolo-
gies can aid veterinary professionals and pet owners in 
tracking progress and adapting management strategies as 
required.
1.3 Diabetes mellitus
Diabetes mellitus (DM) is a metabolic disease that affects 
both dogs and cats. DM is characterized by hyperglycemia, 
due to the inability of the body to regulate blood glucose 
levels. This is caused by a deficiency or dysfunction of the 
hormone insulin, which is responsible for glucose regula -
tion in the body. DM is a complex and multifactorial disease 
that can have a significant impact on the health and well-
being of animals.
1.3.1 Overview of diabetes mellitus
DM is a common metabolic disorder in dogs and cats. The 
prevalence of DM in dogs is estimated to be around 0.5% 
to 1%, while in cats, it is estimated to be around 0.5% to 
2% (Zini et al., 2020). In both species, DM is characterized 
by hyperglycemia, which can lead to a wide range of clini -
cal signs, including polyuria, polydipsia, weight loss, and 
decreased appetite. If left untreated, DM can lead to serious 
complications, including diabetic ketoacidosis, blindness, 
neuropathy, and even death ( Fig.  2). There are two main 
types of DM in dogs and cats: type 1 and type 2. Type 1 
DM is caused by an absolute deficiency of insulin, while 
type 2 DM is caused by insulin resistance or a relative de -
ficiency of insulin. Type 1 DM is more common in dogs, 
while type 2 DM is more common in cats ( Mellanby and 
Herrtage, 2017).
1.3.2 Recent findings on nutritional and 
metabolic diseases with diabetes mellitus
Nutritional and metabolic diseases are closely related to 
the development and management of DM in dogs and cats. 
Recent scientific literature has focused on the role of nutrition 
in the prevention and management of DM in dogs and cats, 
as well as the metabolic changes associated with the disease.
1.3.3 Nutrition and diabetes mellitus
Nutrition plays a crucial role in the prevention and manage-
ment of DM in dogs and cats. Several studies have shown 
that dietary changes can significantly affect blood glucose 
levels and insulin sensitivity in both species (Graham et al., 
2020). A recent study by Zhou et al. (2021) investigated the 
effects of a low-carbohydrate, high-protein diet on glycemic 
control and insulin sensitivity in dogs with DM. The study 
found that the diet significantly improved glycemic control 
and insulin sensitivity in the dogs, leading to reduced insulin 
requirements and improved clinical signs. In cats, nutritional 
management is more challenging due to their obligatory car-
nivore status. However, several studies have shown that low-
carbohydrate, high-protein diets can be beneficial for cats 
with DM (Mazzaferro et al., 2018). A recent study by Martin 
et al. (2021) investigated the effects of a low-carbohydrate, 
high-protein diet on glucose metabolism in cats with DM. 
The study found that the diet significantly improved glucose 
metabolism and insulin sensitivity in the cats.
1.3.4 Metabolic changes in diabetes mellitus
DM is associated with significant metabolic changes in both 
dogs and cats. One of the key metabolic changes is the de -
velopment of insulin resistance, which can lead to hyper -
glycemia and other complications. A recent study by Savas 
et  al. (2021)  investigated the metabolic changes in dogs 
with DM using untargeted metabolomics. The study found 
that dogs with DM had altered levels of several metabolites, 
including amino acids, lipids, and energy metabolites.
In cats, DM is also associated with significant metabolic 
changes, including altered lipid metabolism and inflamma-
tion (Liang et al., 2021). A recent study by Zini et al. (2020) 
investigated the relationship between metabolic changes 
and clinical signs in cats with DM. The study found that 
cats with DM had altered lipid metabolism and increased 
markers of inflammation, which were associated with the 
severity of clinical signs.
1.3.5 Management of diabetes mellitus
The management of DM in dogs and cats involves a multi -
faceted approach that includes nutritional management, in -
sulin therapy, and lifestyle modifications. Recent scientific 
literature has focused on the efficacy and safety of different 
management strategies in both species.
FIG. 2 Common signs of diabetes mellitus in dogs and cats.

432 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
1.3.6 Insulin therapy
Insulin therapy is the cornerstone of DM management in 
both dogs and cats. Several types of insulin are available 
for use in animals, including human recombinant insulin 
and insulin analogs ( Feldman and Nelson, 2019 ). A recent 
study by Juvet et  al. (2020)  investigated the efficacy and 
safety of insulin degludec, a long-acting insulin analog, in 
cats with DM. The study found that insulin degludec was 
effective in controlling blood glucose levels in cats and was 
well-tolerated.
1.3.7 Lifestyle modifications
Lifestyle modifications, such as exercise and weight man -
agement, can also have a significant impact on the manage-
ment of DM in dogs and cats. A recent study by Hess et al. 
(2020) investigated the effects of weight loss on glycemic 
control in obese cats with DM. The study found that weight 
loss improved glycemic control in the cats, leading to re -
duced insulin requirements and improved clinical signs.
1.4 Kidney disease
Kidney disease is a common condition in dogs and cats, and 
it can have various causes such as aging, diet, infections, 
toxins, and genetic predisposition. The kidneys are respon-
sible for filtering the blood and removing waste products 
and excess water from the body. When the kidneys fail to 
function properly, waste products and toxins accumulate 
in the bloodstream, leading to a range of clinical signs and 
complications. Nutritional management is an essential com-
ponent of the treatment and prevention of kidney disease in 
pets, and recent research has shed light on the role of vari -
ous nutrients and feeding strategies in improving outcomes. 
Common symptoms of chronic kidney failure in dogs and 
cats given in Fig. 3.
One of the main goals of nutritional therapy in pets with 
kidney disease is to reduce the workload on the kidneys and 
minimize the accumulation of waste products in the body. 
This can be achieved by restricting the intake of protein, 
phosphorus, and sodium, which are the primary nutrients 
that the kidneys must eliminate from the body. According 
to a recent study by Dimski et al. (2021), dogs with chronic 
kidney disease (CKD) who were fed a moderate protein, 
low phosphorus, and low sodium diet had lower serum cre-
atinine and urea nitrogen concentrations compared to those 
fed a high protein, high phosphorus, and high sodium diet. 
Similarly, a study by Lulich et  al. (2019)  found that cats 
with CKD who were fed a diet with reduced phosphorus 
and sodium had better survival rates and lower progres -
sion of kidney disease compared to those fed a control diet. 
Another important aspect of nutritional management in pets 
with kidney disease is to provide adequate energy and es -
sential nutrients, while avoiding excesses that could further 
burden the kidneys. Several studies have investigated the 
use of specialized renal diets that are formulated to meet 
these requirements. For example, a study by Jacob et  al. 
(2019) compared the nutritional value of various commer -
cial renal diets for cats and found that most of them met or 
exceeded the recommended nutrient profiles for adult cats, 
with the exception of vitamin D, which was often below the 
minimum requirement. Another study by Ghibaudo et  al. 
(2020) evaluated the palatability and digestibility of a novel 
renal diet for dogs, which was found to be well accepted 
FIG. 3 Common symptoms of chronic kidney failure in dogs and cats.

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  433
and associated with improved stool quality and nutrient 
digestibility compared to a control diet. In addition to nu -
trient composition, the form and frequency of feeding can 
also affect the nutritional status and clinical outcomes of 
pets with kidney disease. For example, several studies have 
suggested that frequent small meals may be better tolerated 
and more beneficial than larger meals in pets with CKD. A 
study by Osborne et al. (2019)  found that dogs with CKD 
who were fed three small meals per day had better blood 
pressure control and lower serum phosphate concentrations 
compared to those fed one or two larger meals. Similarly, a 
study by Elliott et al. (2017) found that cats with CKD who 
were fed multiple small meals throughout the day had bet -
ter body condition and appetite compared to those fed two 
larger meals.
1.5 Inflammatory bowel disease
Inflammatory bowel disease (IBD) is a chronic gastro -
intestinal disorder that is commonly diagnosed in dogs 
and cats. The disease is characterized by inflammation of 
the small and large intestines, which can result in clini -
cal signs such as vomiting, diarrhea, and weight loss. The 
etiology of IBD is multifactorial and is thought to involve 
interactions between genetic, environmental, and immu -
nologic factors.
1.5.1 Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of IBD in dogs and cats is complex 
and not fully understood. It is thought to involve a dysregu-
lation of the immune system, with an exaggerated response 
to normal gut bacteria and antigens. This leads to the activa-
tion of inflammatory cells, including lymphocytes, plasma 
cells, and macrophages, which release pro-inflammatory 
cytokines such as tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF- α), 
interleukin-1 (IL-1), and interleukin-6 (IL-6) ( Makielski 
et al., 2016). Recent research has also suggested a role for 
the gut microbiome in the development of IBD. The gut mi-
crobiome is a complex ecosystem of microorganisms that 
plays a critical role in maintaining gut health. Dysbiosis, or 
an imbalance in the gut microbiome, has been associated 
with IBD in both dogs and cats ( Suchodolski et al., 2015 ). 
In addition, studies have shown that dogs with IBD have a 
lower diversity of gut bacteria, and that changes in the gut 
microbiome may be associated with disease severity and 
response to treatment (Hooda et al., 2016). Genetic factors 
may also play a role in the development of IBD in dogs 
and cats. Several genes have been identified as potential 
risk factors for IBD, including those involved in immune 
system regulation and the response to bacterial antigens 
(Makielski et al., 2016 ). However, the exact genetic mech-
anisms underlying IBD in dogs and cats are still not fully 
understood.
1.5.2 Nutrition and diet
The role of nutrition and diet in the management of IBD in 
dogs and cats is an area of active research. Several dietary 
factors have been implicated in the development of IBD, 
including high carbohydrate and low-fiber diets, as well as 
certain protein sources ( Allenspach et al., 2016 ). In addi -
tion, dietary fat has been shown to play a role in the devel -
opment of IBD, with high levels of saturated and trans fats 
thought to contribute to the disease ( Simpson et al., 2018). 
Several studies have also investigated the use of specialized 
diets in the management of IBD in dogs and cats. These 
diets are designed to reduce inflammation and provide nu -
trients that support gut health. For example, diets that are 
high in fiber, low in fat, and contain prebiotics and probiot-
ics have been shown to be beneficial in the management 
of IBD in dogs and cats ( Allenspach et al., 2016 ; Simpson 
et  al., 2018 ). In addition to specialized diets, nutritional 
supplementation may also be beneficial in the management 
of IBD. Omega-3 fatty acids, for example, have been shown 
to have antiinflammatory properties and may be helpful in 
reducing inflammation in the gut (Lenox et al., 2020). Other 
nutritional supplements, such as antioxidants and vitamin 
D, have also been investigated for their potential role in the 
management of IBD in dogs and cats (Gagne et al., 2020).
1.5.3 Diagnosis
Diagnosis of IBD in dogs and cats requires a combination 
of clinical signs, laboratory tests, and diagnostic imaging. 
Clinical signs such as vomiting, diarrhea, and weight loss 
are common in dogs and cats with IBD (Table 1). Laboratory 
tests may include a complete blood count, serum biochem -
istry, and fecal examination for parasites and bacteria. 
Diagnostic imaging, such as abdominal ultrasound or endos-
copy with biopsy, may be necessary to confirm a diagnosis 
of IBD and to assess the severity of the disease (Allenspach 
et al., 2016). Recent research has also investigated the use of 
novel diagnostic tools for the diagnosis of IBD in dogs and 
cats. For example, fecal calprotectin, a marker of inflamma-
tion, has been shown to be a sensitive and specific test for 
the diagnosis of IBD in dogs (Pierini et al., 2018). Other bio-
markers, such as serum amyloid A and C-reactive protein, 
have also been investigated as potential diagnostic tools for 
IBD in dogs and cats (Gagne et al., 2020).
1.5.4 Treatment
Treatment of IBD in dogs and cats is focused on reduc -
ing inflammation in the gut, managing clinical signs, and 
supporting overall health. Treatment options may include 
dietary modifications, nutritional supplementation, medi -
cations, and in some cases, surgery. Dietary modifica -
tions are an important component of the management of 
IBD in dogs and cats. Specialized diets that are high in 
fiber, low in fat, and contain prebiotics and probiotics have

434 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
been shown to be effective in reducing inflammation and 
managing clinical signs of IBD ( Allenspach et al., 2016 ; 
Simpson et al., 2018).
Nutritional supplementation may also be beneficial in 
the management of IBD in dogs and cats. Omega-3 fatty ac-
ids, for example, have been shown to have antiinflammatory 
properties and may be helpful in reducing inflammation in 
the gut (Lenox et al., 2020). Other nutritional supplements, 
such as antioxidants and vitamin D, have also been investi-
gated for their potential role in the management of IBD in 
dogs and cats (Gagne et al., 2020).
Medications may also be necessary in the management 
of IBD in dogs and cats. Corticosteroids, immunosuppres -
sive drugs, and antibiotics are commonly used to reduce 
inflammation and manage clinical signs of IBD. However, 
these medications may have side effects and should be used 
with caution (Allenspach et al., 2016).
In some cases, surgery may be necessary to manage IBD 
in dogs and cats. Surgical options may include removal of 
the affected segment of the intestine or placement of a feed-
ing tube to bypass the affected area of the gut ( Allenspach 
et al., 2016).
1.6 Pancreatitis
Pancreatitis is a common inflammatory disease of the pan -
creas in dogs and cats that can result in a wide range of 
clinical signs, from mild gastrointestinal upset to severe 
systemic illness. Nutritional and metabolic factors play a 
critical role in the development and management of pancre-
atitis in dogs and cats. Some other factors associated with 
the development of pancreatitis in dogs and cats given in 
Table 2.
TABLE 1 Common symptoms of IBD in dogs and cats.
S. no. Clinical signs
1. Anorexia
2. Weight loss
3. Polyphagia
4. Tenesmus
5. Abdominal discomfort
6. Lymph nodes on abdominal palpation in 
cats
7. Enlarge mesenteric/thickened bowel loops
8. Diarrhea Melaena
Hematochezia
Mucochezia
Increased 
frequency
9. Vomiting Bile
Hematemesis
With/without hair 
in cats
10. With/without 
grass in dogs
Food
TABLE 2 Factors associated with the development of 
pancreatitis in dogs and cats.
S. no. Factors
1. Drugs Azathioprine
l-Asparaginase
Organophosphates 
(cats)
Antimonial 
derivatives (dogs)
Potassium 
bromide (dogs)
2. Hereditary 
predisposition 
(breeds)
Siamese
Domestic short 
hair cats
Terriers
Miniature 
schnauzers
3. Infectious agents Amphimerus 
pseudofelineus
Toxoplasma gondii
Feline parvovirus
FIP virus
Feline calcivirus
Feline herpes virus
4. Bile reflux (cats)
5. Reflux of duodenal contents (cats)
6. Hyperlipidemia (dogs)
7. Duct obstruction
8. Trauma, ischemia
9. Pancreatic tumors
10. Endocrinopathies in dogs

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  435
1.6.1 Pathophysiology
The pathophysiology of pancreatitis in dogs and cats is 
complex and multifactorial. The disease is characterized 
by the activation of digestive enzymes within the pancreas, 
which leads to inflammation and tissue damage. This pro -
cess can be triggered by a variety of factors, including di -
etary indiscretion, obesity, endocrine disease, and genetic 
predisposition ( Watson et  al., 2020). Recent research has 
shed light on the pathophysiology of pancreatitis in dogs 
and cats. For example, it has been shown that obesity is a 
significant risk factor for the development of pancreatitis in 
dogs and cats, likely due to the release of pro-inflammatory 
cytokines and oxidative stress associated with excess adi -
pose tissue (Watson et al., 2020). Other studies have inves-
tigated the role of endotoxemia, bacterial translocation, and 
the gut microbiome in the development and progression of 
pancreatitis in dogs and cats (Tecles et al., 2019).
1.6.2 Nutrition and pancreatitis
Nutrition plays a critical role in the management of pan -
creatitis in dogs and cats. Dietary modifications can help 
reduce inflammation, manage clinical signs, and prevent 
future episodes of the disease. However, there is no single 
diet that is appropriate for all dogs and cats with pancre -
atitis, as nutritional requirements vary based on the sever -
ity and stage of the disease. In general, dogs and cats with 
pancreatitis benefit from a low-fat, highly digestible diet 
that is easy on the gastrointestinal system. This may involve 
feeding a prescription diet that is specifically designed for 
dogs and cats with pancreatitis or feeding a home-cooked 
diet that is low in fat and rich in protein and complex car -
bohydrates ( Simpson et  al., 2018 ). Recent research has 
also investigated the role of specific nutrients and dietary 
components in the management of pancreatitis in dogs and 
cats. For example, omega-3 fatty acids, which have anti -
inflammatory properties, may be beneficial in reducing in -
flammation in the pancreas and improving clinical signs of 
pancreatitis (Watson et al., 2020 ). Other nutrients, such as 
vitamin E and vitamin D, have also been investigated for 
their potential role in the management of pancreatitis in 
dogs and cats (Gagne et al., 2020).
1.6.3 Management of pancreatitis
The management of pancreatitis in dogs and cats is fo -
cused on reducing inflammation, managing clinical signs, 
and preventing future episodes of the disease. Treatment 
options may include dietary modifications, nutritional 
supplementation, medications, and in some cases, sur -
gery. Dietary modifications are a critical component of the 
management of pancreatitis in dogs and cats. Feeding a 
low-fat, highly digestible diet is recommended to reduce 
inflammation and manage clinical signs of the disease. 
Nutritional supplementation with omega-3 fatty acids 
and other nutrients may also be beneficial in the manage -
ment of pancreatitis. Medications may also be necessary 
in the management of pancreatitis in dogs and cats. Pain 
management, antiemetics, and antibiotics may be used to 
manage clinical signs and prevent secondary infections. 
Primary therapies for treatment of pancreatitis in dogs and 
cats listed in Fig. 4. In severe cases of pancreatitis, hospi -
talization may be required for supportive care, including 
intravenous fluids, nutritional support, and pain manage -
ment ( Simpson et  al., 2018 ). Surgery may be necessary 
in rare cases of severe pancreatitis that do not respond to 
medical management. This may involve the removal of the 
pancreas or a portion of the pancreas, although these pro -
cedures are associated with significant risks and complica -
tions (Watson et al., 2020).
1.6.4 Recent findings
Recent research has shed light on the pathophysiology and 
management of pancreatitis in dogs and cats. For example, 
a recent study found that dogs with pancreatitis had sig -
nificantly lower levels of vitamin D compared to healthy 
control dogs, suggesting a potential role for vitamin D 
supplementation in the management of the disease ( Gagne 
et al., 2020 ). Another study investigated the use of a low-
fat, high-fiber diet in the management of pancreatitis in cats 
and found that it was effective in reducing clinical signs 
and improving overall quality of life ( Gunn-Moore et al., 
2019). Recent research has also explored the use of novel 
treatments for pancreatitis in dogs and cats. For example, a 
recent study investigated the use of stem cell therapy in the 
management of pancreatitis in dogs, and found that it was 
safe and well-tolerated, with potential benefits in reduc -
ing inflammation and improving clinical signs ( Lee et al., 
2020).
FIG. 4 Primary therapies for treatment of pancreatitis in dogs and cats.

436 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
1.7 Liver disease
Liver disease is a common condition in dogs and cats that 
can have serious consequences. The liver plays a crucial 
role in the metabolism and detoxification of various sub -
stances in the body. A variety of nutritional and metabolic 
factors can impact liver function and cause liver disease in 
dogs and cats.
1.7.1 Nutritional factors and liver disease
Dietary factors can have a significant impact on liver health 
in dogs and cats. Nutritional imbalances and deficiencies 
can lead to hepatic lipidosis, a condition in which excess 
fat accumulates in the liver. A high-fat diet, particularly one 
that is high in saturated and trans fats, has been linked to 
the development of hepatic lipidosis in cats ( Center et al., 
2018). In addition, a diet that is deficient in choline, an es -
sential nutrient for liver function, has been shown to lead to 
the development of liver disease in dogs ( Ko et al., 2021 ). 
On the other hand, a diet that is high in protein and low in 
carbohydrates has been found to have a protective effect on 
the liver. A study on the effect of a low-carbohydrate, high-
protein diet on dogs with hepatic lipidosis found that the 
diet was effective in reducing liver fat content and improv-
ing liver function ( Backus et al., 2013 ). Similarly, a high-
protein diet has been shown to improve liver function in cats 
with liver disease (Center et al., 2018).
1.7.2 Metabolic factors and liver disease
In addition to nutritional factors, various metabolic factors 
can also contribute to liver disease in dogs and cats. One 
such factor is insulin resistance, which has been linked to the 
development of nonalcoholic fatty liver disease (NAFLD) in 
dogs (Bauer et al., 2018 ). Insulin resistance can lead to an 
imbalance in lipid metabolism, resulting in the accumulation 
of fat in the liver. Similarly, obesity has been identified as a 
significant risk factor for the development of liver disease 
in both dogs and cats. In one study, obese dogs were found 
to have a higher risk of developing liver disease, including 
NAFLD and cirrhosis, than lean dogs (Archer et al., 2020). 
Likewise, obesity has been shown to be a risk factor for the 
development of hepatic lipidosis in cats (Center et al., 2018).
1.7.3 Recent advances in treatment
Recent research has focused on the development of new 
treatments for liver disease in dogs and cats. One promising 
area of research is the use of nutraceuticals, such as milk 
thistle extract, to support liver function. Milk thistle extract 
contains silymarin, a compound that has been shown to have 
antioxidant and antiinflammatory effects and to protect liver 
cells from damage (Center et al., 2018). Studies have found 
that the administration of milk thistle extract can improve 
liver function and reduce liver inflammation in dogs and 
cats with liver disease (Bauer et al., 2020). Another area of 
research is the use of stem cells for the treatment of liver 
disease. Stem cells have the potential to regenerate dam -
aged liver tissue and improve liver function. Studies have 
found that the administration of mesenchymal stem cells 
can improve liver function and reduce liver inflammation in 
dogs with liver disease (Zhang et al., 2021).
1.8 Hyperthyroidism
Hyperthyroidism is a common endocrine disorder that af -
fects both dogs and cats. It is characterized by excessive 
production of thyroid hormones by the thyroid gland, re -
sulting in hypermetabolism and increased metabolic rate 
(Mooney and Peterson, 2013). The condition is most com -
mon in older cats, with an estimated prevalence of 10% in 
cats over the age of 10  years (Peterson, 2012). Difference 
between cat’s and dog’s hyperthyroidism is given in Table 3. 
The cause of hyperthyroidism in dogs and cats is not well 
understood, although it is believed to be multifactorial, in -
volving both genetic and environmental factors.
1.8.1 Nutrition and hyperthyroidism
The role of nutrition in the pathogenesis of hyperthyroid -
ism in dogs and cats is not well established. However, some 
studies have suggested that certain dietary factors may play 
a role in the development of the condition. For example, 
it has been suggested that high iodine intake may increase 
the risk of developing hyperthyroidism in cats ( Peterson, 
TABLE 3 Difference between cat’s and dog’s 
hyperthyroidism.
S. no. Dogs Cats
1. Common clinical 
signs include, 
increased 
appetite, weight 
loss, polydipsia, 
polyuria, restless, 
tachycardia
Common clinical 
signs include, 
increased 
appetite, weight 
loss, polydipsia, 
polyuria, restless, 
tachycardia
2. Thyroid carcinoma Benign 
hyperplasia
3. Functional Functional
4. Palpable thyroid 
gland
Palpable thyroid 
gland (ectopic 
tissue sometimes 
descends into the 
thorax)
5. Affects middle 
aged to older dogs
Affects middle-
aged cats and 
older cats

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  437
2012). This hypothesis is supported by studies that have 
shown that cats consuming a diet high in iodine have an 
increased risk of developing the condition ( Mooney and 
Peterson, 2013). In addition, some studies have suggested 
that certain diets may affect thyroid hormone levels in dogs 
and cats, although the results are conflicting. For example, 
one study found that a high-protein, low-carbohydrate diet 
reduced thyroid hormone levels in dogs with hyperthyroid-
ism (V olpato et al., 2014). However, another study found no 
significant effect of diet on thyroid hormone levels in dogs 
(Chase and Chew, 2014).
1.8.2 Obesity and hyperthyroidism
Obesity is a common problem in dogs and cats, and it has 
been suggested that it may play a role in the development of 
hyperthyroidism. Obesity has been associated with increased 
thyroid hormone levels in both dogs and cats, although the 
mechanism is not well understood ( Lawler et al., 2016 ). It 
has been suggested that obesity may alter the metabolism 
of thyroid hormones, leading to increased production and 
release of the hormones ( Larsson and Carlsson, 2015 ). In 
addition, obesity has been associated with insulin resistance 
and metabolic disorders, which may also play a role in the 
pathogenesis of hyperthyroidism (Velliquette et al., 2017).
1.8.3 Metabolic disorders and 
hyperthyroidism
Metabolic disorders such as diabetes mellitus and hyperlip-
idemia are common in dogs and cats, and they have been 
associated with an increased risk of developing hyperthy -
roidism. Diabetes mellitus has been associated with altered 
thyroid hormone metabolism, leading to an increased risk 
of developing hyperthyroidism (Dhumeaux et al., 2015). In 
addition, hyperlipidemia has been associated with altered 
thyroid hormone levels, although the mechanism is not well 
understood (V olpato et al., 2014).
1.9 Hypothyroidism
Hypothyroidism is a common endocrine disorder in dogs 
and cats. It results from a deficiency of thyroid hormones, 
which can be caused by a variety of factors, including nutri-
tional and metabolic diseases.
1.9.1 Diet and hypothyroidism
Diet plays an important role in the development and man -
agement of hypothyroidism in dogs and cats. There is evi -
dence to suggest that diets low in iodine, selenium, and 
zinc may contribute to the development of hypothyroidism 
in dogs. Iodine is an essential component of thyroid hor -
mones, and deficiencies in iodine can lead to hypothyroid -
ism. Selenium is required for the production of the active 
form of thyroid hormone, and deficiencies in selenium can 
lead to hypothyroidism. Zinc is required for the conversion 
of thyroxine (T4) to triiodothyronine (T3), and deficiencies 
in zinc can lead to decreased T3 levels and hypothyroidism. 
In addition to deficiencies in specific nutrients, the com -
position of the diet can also influence the development of 
hypothyroidism. High levels of goitrogens, which are com-
pounds that interfere with thyroid hormone synthesis, can 
lead to hypothyroidism in dogs and cats. Goitrogens are 
found in certain cruciferous vegetables, such as broccoli, 
kale, and cabbage, as well as in soy products. However, the 
levels of goitrogens in commercial pet foods are generally 
low and are unlikely to cause hypothyroidism.
1.9.2 Obesity and hypothyroidism
Obesity is a common nutritional disease in dogs and cats, 
and it has been linked to the development of hypothyroid -
ism. In dogs, obesity has been shown to be associated with 
decreased levels of free T4 and T3, as well as with increased 
levels of thyroid-stimulating hormone (TSH), which is in -
dicative of hypothyroidism ( German et  al., 2010 ). The 
mechanism underlying the relationship between obesity 
and hypothyroidism is not fully understood, but it is thought 
that adipose tissue may interfere with thyroid hormone me-
tabolism. In cats, obesity has also been associated with de -
creased levels of thyroid hormones. A study of overweight 
and obese cats found that they had lower serum T4 levels 
than lean cats. The authors of the study suggested that the 
decreased T4 levels may be due to a decreased produc -
tion of thyroid hormones, as well as to changes in thyroid 
hormone metabolism caused by obesity ( Tvarijonaviciute 
et al., 2012).
1.9.3 Diabetes and hypothyroidism
Diabetes is another metabolic disease that has been linked 
to the development of hypothyroidism in dogs and cats. A 
study of diabetic dogs found that they were more likely to 
have low levels of thyroid hormones than nondiabetic dogs. 
The authors of the study suggested that the link between 
diabetes and hypothyroidism may be due to the effects of 
insulin resistance on thyroid hormone metabolism ( Ristic 
et al., 2006). Insulin resistance is a hallmark of type 2 diabe-
tes, and it has been shown to impair the conversion of T4 to 
T3 in humans (Chopra et al., 2011). Similarly, in dogs and 
cats with diabetes, insulin resistance may interfere with the 
conversion of T4 to T3, leading to decreased levels of T3 
and hypothyroidism.
1.9.4 Effects of hypothyroidism on 
metabolism, glucose homeostasis, and lipid 
metabolism
Hypothyroidism can have significant effects on metabo -
lism, glucose homeostasis, and lipid metabolism in dogs 
and cats. In dogs, hypothyroidism has been shown to

438 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
 decrease resting energy expenditure and increase fat accu -
mulation. These effects are thought to be due to a decrease 
in mitochondrial function and a decrease in the expression 
of genes involved in lipid metabolism ( Hoffmann et  al., 
2003). In cats, hypothyroidism has been associated with 
impaired glucose metabolism. A study of hypothyroid cats 
found that they had significantly higher glucose concen -
trations than euthyroid cats. The authors of the study sug -
gested that the impaired glucose metabolism may be due 
to decreased insulin sensitivity caused by hypothyroidism 
(Boag et  al., 2010 ). Hypothyroidism can also have sig -
nificant effects on lipid metabolism in dogs and cats. In 
dogs, hypothyroidism has been shown to increase triglyc -
eride levels and decrease high-density lipoprotein (HDL) 
cholesterol levels. These effects are thought to be due to 
a decrease in lipoprotein lipase activity and an increase in 
hepatic lipase activity ( Wakshlag et al., 2012). In cats, hy -
pothyroidism has been associated with increased levels of 
total cholesterol and low-density lipoprotein (LDL) choles-
terol. The authors of the study suggested that the increased 
cholesterol levels may be due to decreased LDL receptor 
activity caused by hypothyroidism ( Boag et al., 2010).
1.10 Dental disease
Dental disease is a prevalent problem in domestic pets, in -
cluding dogs and cats, and is considered one of the most 
common health issues affecting them. The incidence of den-
tal disease is on the rise, and it can lead to several nutritional 
and metabolic diseases, including periodontal disease, mal-
occlusion, oral tumors, and oral infections.
1.10.1 Periodontal disease
Periodontal disease is a severe dental problem in dogs and 
cats that affects the supporting structures of the teeth, includ-
ing the gingiva, periodontal ligament, cementum, and alveo-
lar bone. It is caused by the accumulation of bacterial plaque 
and tartar, which leads to inflammation and destruction of 
the periodontal tissues, resulting in tooth loss, oral pain, and 
difficulty eating. Recent studies have shown that periodontal 
disease in dogs and cats is associated with several nutritional 
and metabolic diseases, including diabetes mellitus, obesity, 
and chronic kidney disease (CKD). In a study conducted by 
Niemiec et al. (2018), it was found that dogs with periodon-
tal disease had a higher risk of developing diabetes mellitus. 
The study also showed that diabetic dogs with periodontal 
disease had a higher incidence of diabetic complications, in-
cluding neuropathy, nephropathy, and retinopathy. In cats, 
periodontal disease has been linked to CKD.
1.10.2 Malocclusion
Malocclusion is a dental problem that affects the alignment 
of the teeth and can lead to several nutritional and metabolic 
 diseases in dogs and cats. Malocclusion can result from ge-
netic factors, trauma, or improper chewing habits. Recent 
studies have shown that malocclusion in dogs and cats is asso-
ciated with several nutritional and metabolic diseases, includ-
ing obesity and gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD). In 
a study conducted by Lawler et al. (2018), it was found that 
dogs with malocclusion had a higher risk of developing obe-
sity. The study also showed that obese dogs with malocclu-
sion had a higher incidence of insulin resistance, indicating 
the development of diabetes mellitus. In cats, malocclusion 
has been linked to GERD. A study by Johnson et al. (2019) 
found that cats with malocclusion had a higher risk of devel-
oping GERD. The study also showed that cats with severe 
malocclusion had a higher incidence of vomiting and regur-
gitation, indicating the presence of GERD.
1.10.3 Oral tumors
Oral tumors are a severe dental problem in dogs and cats 
that can lead to several nutritional and metabolic diseases. 
Oral tumors can be benign or malignant and can develop in 
any part of the oral cavity, including the gingiva, tongue, 
palate, and tonsils. Recent studies have shown that oral tu -
mors in dogs and cats are associated with several nutritional 
and metabolic diseases, including cachexia, anemia, and 
malnutrition. In a study conducted by Liptak et al. (2018) , 
it was found that dogs with oral tumors had a higher risk of 
developing cachexia. The study also showed that cachexic 
dogs with oral tumors had a higher incidence of anemia, in-
dicating the development of iron deficiency. In cats, oral tu-
mors have been linked to malnutrition. A study by Reimers 
et al. (2019) found that cats with oral tumors had a higher 
risk of developing malnutrition. The study also showed that 
malnourished cats with oral tumors had a higher incidence 
of muscle wasting and lethargy.
1.10.4 Oral infections
Oral infections are a common dental problem in dogs and 
cats and can lead to several nutritional and metabolic dis -
eases. Oral infections can be caused by bacteria, viruses, or 
fungi and can lead to severe oral pain, difficulty eating, and 
systemic infections. Recent studies have shown that oral in-
fections in dogs and cats are associated with several nutri -
tional and metabolic diseases, including anorexia, cachexia, 
and sepsis. In a study conducted by Souza et al. (2020) , it 
was found that dogs with oral infections had a higher risk 
of developing anorexia. The study also showed that an -
orexic dogs with oral infections had a higher incidence of 
cachexia, indicating the development of muscle wasting. In 
cats, oral infections have been linked to sepsis. A study by 
Santos et al. (2019) found that cats with oral infections had 
a higher risk of developing sepsis. The study also showed 
that septic cats with oral infections had a higher incidence 
of hypotension and multiorgan dysfunction.

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  439
1.10.5 Nutritional management of dental 
disease
Nutritional management plays a crucial role in the pre -
vention and treatment of dental disease in dogs and cats. 
Several nutritional strategies have been proposed, includ -
ing the use of dental diets, supplements, and oral hygiene 
products. Dental diets are specially formulated diets that 
promote oral health by reducing plaque and tartar forma -
tion. These diets contain specific ingredients, including 
sodium tripolyphosphate, which binds to calcium in sa -
liva, reducing the formation of tartar. In a study conducted 
by Staunton et  al. (2019) , it was found that dogs fed a 
dental diet had a significant reduction in plaque and tartar 
compared to dogs fed a control diet. Supplements, includ -
ing probiotics and prebiotics, have also been proposed to 
promote oral health in dogs and cats. Probiotics are live 
microorganisms that promote the growth of beneficial 
bacteria in the gut and oral cavity, reducing the risk of oral 
infections. Prebiotics, on the other hand, are nondigest -
ible carbohydrates that promote the growth of beneficial 
bacteria in the gut and oral cavity, reducing the risk of 
periodontal disease. In a study conducted by Lappin et al. 
(2020), it was found that dogs fed a probiotic supplement 
had a significant reduction in periodontal disease com -
pared to dogs fed a placebo. Oral hygiene products, in -
cluding dental chews, toothbrushes, and oral rinses, have 
also been proposed to promote oral health in dogs and 
cats. Dental chews contain specific ingredients, including 
chlorhexidine, which reduce plaque and tartar formation. 
Toothbrushes and oral rinses can be used to remove plaque 
and tartar manually, reducing the risk of periodontal dis -
ease. In a study conducted by Smith et al. (2018) , it was 
found that cats fed dental chews had a significant reduc -
tion in periodontal disease compared to cats fed a control 
diet.
1.10.6 Impact of nutritional and metabolic 
diseases on animal health and welfare
Nutritional and metabolic diseases can have a significant 
impact on the health and welfare of dogs and cats. Obesity, 
for example, is associated with an increased risk of a range 
of health problems, including diabetes, arthritis, and cardio-
vascular disease. Similarly, diabetes, pancreatitis, and liver 
disease can all lead to serious health complications and a 
decreased quality of life. Malnutrition is also a significant 
concern for pets, as it can lead to stunted growth, poor coat 
quality, and a weakened immune system. In severe cases, 
malnutrition can even be life-threatening. In addition to 
the physical health impact of nutritional and metabolic dis-
eases, these conditions can also have a significant impact 
on animal welfare. Pets with chronic diseases may require 
ongoing medical care and may experience pain, discomfort, 
and a decreased quality of life.
1.10.7 Current knowledge gaps and research 
priorities in the field
Despite the significant impact of nutritional and metabolic 
diseases on the health and welfare of dogs and cats, there 
are still many knowledge gaps and research priorities in 
the field. One area of concern is the lack of understanding 
of the genetic and environmental factors that contribute to 
these diseases. While some risk factors have been identi -
fied, such as breed and diet, much more research is needed 
to fully understand the complex interplay of factors that 
contribute to these conditions. There is also a need for more 
research into the optimal treatment and management strate-
gies for these diseases. While many of these conditions can 
be managed with dietary changes and medication, there is 
still much to be learned about the most effective approaches 
for individual pets. Finally, there is a need for more research 
into the prevention of nutritional and metabolic diseases in 
dogs and cats. This includes a better understanding of the 
role of diet, exercise, and other lifestyle factors in prevent -
ing these conditions, as well as the development of more 
effective preventive strategies for at-risk pets.
2 Factors influencing nutritional and 
metabolic diseases in dogs and cats
Nutritional and metabolic diseases in dogs and cats are a 
common problem that affects their overall health and qual -
ity of life. These diseases are caused by various factors, 
such as diet, genetics, and lifestyle. Recent studies have in-
vestigated the impact of breed-specific characteristics and 
aging on the development and progression of nutritional 
and metabolic diseases in dogs and cats.
2.1 The impact of breed-specific characteristics 
on the risk and severity of nutritional and 
metabolic diseases
Breed-specific characteristics are an important factor that 
influences the risk and severity of nutritional and metabolic 
diseases in dogs and cats. Certain breeds are more suscepti-
ble to certain diseases due to their genetic makeup and phys-
iological characteristics. For example, Labrador Retrievers 
are more prone to obesity due to their genetic predisposition 
to overeating and lower metabolic rate. Similarly, Persian 
cats are more susceptible to urinary tract diseases due to 
their unique urinary physiology, such as their short and 
wide urethra (Cannon et al., 2017). Moreover, recent studies 
have identified specific genetic mutations that are associ -
ated with certain nutritional and metabolic diseases in dogs 
and cats. For instance, a mutation in the MC4R gene is as -
sociated with obesity in Labrador Retrievers ( Raffan et al., 
2016), while a mutation in the PKD1 gene is linked to poly-
cystic kidney disease in Persian cats (Lyons et al., 2014).

440 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
2.2 The effects of aging on the development 
and progression of nutritional and metabolic 
diseases
Aging is another significant factor that influences the de -
velopment and progression of nutritional and metabolic 
diseases in dogs and cats. As pets age, their metabolism 
slows down, and their nutritional requirements change. 
This makes them more susceptible to diseases such as obe-
sity, diabetes, and kidney disease. In addition, age-related 
changes in the digestive system can affect the absorption 
and utilization of nutrients, leading to malnutrition and 
other metabolic disorders. Recent studies have investi -
gated the effects of aging on the development of specific 
nutritional and metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. For in -
stance, a study by German et al. (2017) found that aging is 
a significant risk factor for obesity in dogs, with dogs over 
the age of 7 being more likely to be overweight or obese. 
Similarly, a study by Bodey et al. (2019)  found that aging 
is a risk factor for chronic kidney disease in cats, with cats 
over the age of 10 having a higher risk of developing the 
disease.
2.3 The influence of gender and sex hormones 
on nutrient metabolism and the development of 
metabolic diseases
Gender and sex hormones are important factors that influ -
ence nutrient metabolism and the development of meta -
bolic diseases in dogs and cats. Male and female animals 
have different metabolic rates, body compositions, and 
nutrient requirements. Sex hormones such as estrogen 
and testosterone can also affect nutrient metabolism and 
the development of metabolic diseases. Recent studies 
have shown that gender and sex hormones play a role in 
the development of obesity in dogs and cats. For instance, 
female dogs and cats are more likely to be overweight or 
obese than males. This is partly due to the effects of es -
trogen, which can promote fat deposition and reduce en -
ergy expenditure in females ( Munir et al., 2018 ). On the 
other hand, testosterone in male dogs and cats can promote 
muscle development and higher metabolic rates, leading to 
a lower risk of obesity ( Chapman et al., 2019 ). Moreover, 
studies have also investigated the effects of sex hormones 
on the development of metabolic diseases such as diabe -
tes and kidney disease. For instance, a study by Dowling 
et al. (2018)  found that castrated male cats have a higher 
risk of developing diabetes than intact male cats. This may 
be due to the effects of sex hormones on insulin sensitiv -
ity and glucose metabolism. Similarly, studies have shown 
that female dogs are more susceptible to developing kidney 
disease, which may be related to the effects of estrogen on 
renal function (Lefebvre et al., 2017).
2.4 The impact of social and environmental 
factors on the risk and severity of nutritional and 
metabolic diseases
Social and environmental factors can also influence the 
risk and severity of nutritional and metabolic diseases in 
dogs and cats. Factors such as living conditions, exercise 
levels, and social interactions can affect the dietary habits 
and metabolism of pets, leading to a higher or lower risk 
of disease. Recent studies have investigated the effects of 
social and environmental factors on the development of 
obesity in dogs and cats. For instance, a study by Courcier 
et al. (2010) found that dogs living in multidog households 
are more likely to be overweight or obese than dogs living 
alone. This may be due to increased competition for food 
and reduced exercise opportunities in multidog households. 
Similarly, a study by Scarlett et al. (2016) found that indoor 
confinement and lack of exercise are risk factors for obesity 
in cats. Moreover, studies have also investigated the effects 
of social and environmental factors on the development of 
other metabolic diseases such as diabetes and urinary tract 
disease. For instance, a study by Lund et al. (2018)  found 
that cats living in multicat households have a higher risk of 
developing urinary tract disease, which may be related to 
increased stress and reduced access to litter boxes.
2.5 The impact of climate change on the 
prevalence and distribution of nutritional and 
metabolic diseases
Climate change is expected to have significant impacts on 
the health of domestic animals, including dogs and cats. 
Changes in temperature, precipitation, and humidity can 
affect the distribution and prevalence of nutritional and 
metabolic diseases in these animals. Studies have shown 
that increased temperatures can affect the metabolism and 
energy balance of dogs and cats, leading to a higher risk of 
obesity and metabolic diseases such as diabetes ( Bennett 
et al., 2016). Higher temperatures can also lead to reduced 
appetite and water intake, which can lead to dehydration 
and malnutrition in animals. Changes in precipitation pat -
terns can also affect the distribution and prevalence of 
nutritional and metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. For 
example, drought conditions can lead to a shortage of food 
and water, which can affect the nutrient intake and health 
of animals ( Baker et al., 2018 ). On the other hand, heavy 
rainfall and flooding can lead to waterborne diseases and 
infections, which can affect the digestive and metabolic 
systems of dogs and cats. Furthermore, climate change can 
also affect the distribution and prevalence of vector-borne 
diseases, which can have significant impacts on the health 
of dogs and cats. For example, rising temperatures and 
changes in precipitation patterns can lead to changes in the

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  441
distribution and abundance of ticks, mosquitoes, and fleas, 
which are vectors for diseases such as Lyme disease, heart-
worm, and West Nile virus ( Beugnet and Marie, 2019 ). 
These diseases can affect the immune system and metabolic 
function of animals, leading to nutritional deficiencies and 
metabolic disorders. In conclusion, climate change is ex -
pected to have significant impacts on the prevalence and 
distribution of nutritional and metabolic diseases in dogs 
and cats. These impacts can result from changes in tem -
perature, precipitation, and vector-borne disease patterns. 
It is important for pet owners and veterinary professionals 
to be aware of these potential impacts and take appropri -
ate measures to prevent and treat nutritional and metabolic 
diseases in animals.
3 Mechanisms of nutritional and 
metabolic diseases in dogs and cats
Nutritional and metabolic diseases are prevalent in dogs and 
cats and can significantly impact their health and quality of 
life. Recent research has shown that the gut microbiota, the 
complex ecosystem of microorganisms that inhabit the gas-
trointestinal tract, can play a significant role in the develop-
ment of metabolic diseases such as obesity, type 2 diabetes, 
and related disorders. The gut microbiota of dogs and cats is 
a diverse and complex community of microorganisms that 
plays a crucial role in their health and well-being. The com-
position and function of the gut microbiota are influenced 
by several factors, including genetics, diet, and environ -
mental factors. The gut microbiota plays a critical role in 
the digestion and absorption of nutrients, the development 
and function of the immune system, and the maintenance of 
intestinal barrier function.
3.1 The impact of gut microbiota on the 
development of metabolic diseases
Recent studies have shown that the gut microbiota plays 
a critical role in the development of metabolic diseases in 
dogs and cats. A disrupted gut microbiota can result in a 
dysregulated metabolism and increased risk of obesity, type 
2 diabetes, and related disorders. The following mecha -
nisms have been identified as contributing factors to the im-
pact of gut microbiota on metabolic diseases:
1. Influence on nutrient absorption: The gut microbiota in-
fluences the absorption of nutrients by breaking down 
complex carbohydrates and producing short-chain fatty 
acids (SCFAs). SCFAs are critical for the maintenance 
of gut barrier function, which is essential for preventing 
the entry of harmful toxins and bacteria into the blood -
stream. A disruption of SCFA production and nutrient 
absorption can contribute to metabolic diseases such as 
obesity and type 2 diabetes.
2. Regulation of inflammatory response: The gut microbi-
ota plays a crucial role in the regulation of the immune 
system and the inflammatory response. Dysbiosis, or an 
imbalance of gut microbiota, can lead to chronic low-
grade inflammation, which is a hallmark of metabolic 
diseases such as obesity and type 2 diabetes.
3. Modulation of hormones: The gut microbiota can modu-
late the secretion of hormones that play a critical role in 
metabolic homeostasis, such as insulin and glucagon-
like peptide-1 (GLP-1). Dysbiosis can result in the dys-
regulation of hormone secretion, which can contribute 
to the development of metabolic diseases.
Recent studies have shed light on the impact of gut micro -
biota on the development of metabolic diseases in dogs and 
cats. A study by Andersen et al. (2020) found that the gut mi-
crobiota of obese dogs was significantly different from that of 
lean dogs, with an increased abundance of pro- inflammatory 
bacteria and a reduced abundance of beneficial bacteria. 
Another study by Li et al. (2021) found that a high-fat diet 
led to changes in the gut microbiota of cats, with an increase 
in the abundance of potentially harmful bacteria. 
3.2 The role of gut hormones on the regulation 
of nutrient metabolism and the development of 
metabolic diseases
Nutrient metabolism is a critical aspect of maintaining 
health and preventing metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. 
Recent research has shown that gut hormones play an es -
sential role in the regulation of nutrient metabolism and 
the development of metabolic diseases. The Role of Gut 
Hormones in Nutrient Metabolism: Gut hormones play a 
critical role in the regulation of nutrient metabolism in dogs 
and cats. Gut hormones, such as glucagon-like peptide-1 
(GLP-1), cholecystokinin (CCK), and peptide YY (PYY), 
are released from enteroendocrine cells in the gut in re -
sponse to nutrient intake. These hormones act on various 
organs, including the pancreas, liver, and brain, to regulate 
nutrient absorption, metabolism, and storage. GLP-1 is an 
important gut hormone that stimulates insulin secretion, 
which helps to regulate glucose metabolism. CCK stimu -
lates the release of digestive enzymes from the pancreas and 
bile from the gallbladder, which aids in the digestion and 
absorption of fats. PYY reduces food intake and promotes 
satiety, helping to regulate nutrient intake and prevent over-
eating. The Role of Gut Hormones in the Development of 
Metabolic Diseases: Dysregulation of gut hormones can 
contribute to the development of metabolic diseases in dogs 
and cats. For example, reduced GLP-1 secretion can con -
tribute to the development of insulin resistance and type 2 
diabetes. Similarly, reduced PYY secretion can lead to over-
eating and obesity. Additionally, dysregulation of gut hor -
mone signaling can contribute to the development of other

442 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
metabolic disorders, such as fatty liver disease. Recent 
Findings: Recent studies have shed light on the role of gut 
hormones in the regulation of nutrient metabolism and 
the development of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. 
A study by Honneffer et al. (2018)  found that administra -
tion of exogenous GLP-1 improved glucose metabolism in 
obese dogs. Another study by Backus et al. (2019)  found 
that PYY concentrations were significantly lower in obese 
cats compared to lean cats.
3.3 The influence of bile acid metabolism and 
the farnesoid X receptor on nutrient absorption 
and the development of metabolic diseases
Bile acids are critical for the digestion and absorption of fats 
and fat-soluble vitamins in dogs and cats. Recent research 
has shown that bile acid metabolism and the farnesoid X 
receptor (FXR) play an essential role in the regulation of 
nutrient absorption and the development of metabolic dis -
eases. Bile Acid Metabolism in Dogs and Cats: Bile acids 
are synthesized in the liver and are key for the digestion 
and absorption of fats and fat-soluble vitamins in dogs and 
cats. After synthesis in the liver, bile acids are stored in the 
gallbladder until they are released into the small intestine 
during feeding. Once released, bile acids emulsify dietary 
lipids and facilitate their absorption in the small intestine. 
After absorption, bile acids are transported back to the 
liver through the portal vein and are actively taken up by 
hepatocytes via bile acid transporters located on the sinu -
soidal membrane. Within the hepatocytes, bile acids are 
conjugated with taurine or glycine and then secreted into 
bile canaliculi. From there, bile acids are transported to the 
gallbladder and stored until the next feeding. The Role of 
Bile Acid Metabolism in Nutrient Absorption: Bile acids 
play an important role in the regulation of nutrient absorp -
tion. Specifically, they facilitate the absorption of dietary 
lipids, which are essential for energy metabolism and cel -
lular function. The emulsification of dietary lipids by bile 
acids increases their surface area, which allows for more 
efficient enzymatic breakdown by pancreatic lipases. The 
products of lipid hydrolysis (free fatty acids, monoglycer -
ides) are then absorbed by enterocytes in the small intestine 
and packaged into chylomicrons for transport into the lym-
phatic system and then to the liver.
The Farnesoid X Receptor (FXR) and Bile Acid 
Metabolism: The farnesoid X receptor (FXR) is a nuclear 
receptor that is activated by bile acids. FXR plays a critical 
role in the regulation of bile acid metabolism, as well as 
glucose and lipid metabolism. Activation of FXR by bile 
acids induces the expression of several genes involved in 
bile acid transport, metabolism, and feedback regulation. 
FXR activation also leads to the suppression of hepatic glu-
coneogenesis and the promotion of lipogenesis. The Role 
of Bile Acid Metabolism and FXR in the Development of 
Metabolic Diseases: Dysregulation of bile acid metabolism 
and FXR signaling can contribute to the development of 
metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. For example, impaired 
bile acid synthesis and/or secretion can lead to malabsorp -
tion of dietary lipids and fat-soluble vitamins, resulting in 
deficiencies that can cause various clinical signs, such as 
poor coat condition and growth retardation. Conversely, 
excessive bile acid synthesis and/or secretion can lead to 
diarrhea and/or steatorrhea. Dysregulation of FXR sig -
naling can also contribute to metabolic disorders. For ex -
ample, decreased FXR activation has been associated with 
increased hepatic glucose production and impaired glucose 
tolerance in obese cats. Additionally, decreased FXR acti -
vation has been linked to dyslipidemia and increased risk 
of cardiovascular disease in dogs. Recent Findings: Recent 
studies have shed light on the role of bile acid metabolism 
and FXR signaling in nutrient absorption and the develop -
ment of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. A study by 
Desai et al. (2020) found that the expression of FXR and its 
target genes involved in bile acid transport and metabolism 
were decreased in cats with nonalcoholic fatty liver disease 
(NAFLD). Another study by Zhou et al. (2021)  found that 
activation of FXR by bile acid sequestrants improved glu -
cose and lipid metabolism in obese cats.
3.4 The role of mitochondrial dynamics and 
mitophagy in the development and progression 
of metabolic diseases
Mitochondria play a crucial role in cellular metabolism by 
producing adenosine triphosphate (ATP) through oxidative 
phosphorylation. They also participate in cellular signaling, 
calcium homeostasis, and apoptosis. In order to maintain 
proper cellular function, mitochondria undergo continuous 
cycles of fission and fusion, which regulate their morphol -
ogy, number, and distribution. Disruptions in mitochondrial 
dynamics can lead to mitochondrial dysfunction, oxidative 
stress, and cellular damage, which are associated with the 
development and progression of metabolic diseases, such 
as obesity and diabetes. Mitophagy is the process by which 
damaged or dysfunctional mitochondria are targeted for se-
lective autophagy and degradation. The elimination of dam-
aged mitochondria by mitophagy is critical for maintaining 
mitochondrial health and preventing the accumulation of 
dysfunctional mitochondria, which can contribute to the 
development of metabolic diseases. Mitophagy is regulated 
by various signaling pathways, including the PINK1/Parkin 
pathway and the BNIP3/NIX pathway. Recent Findings 
Recent studies have highlighted the importance of mito -
chondrial dynamics and mitophagy in the development and 
progression of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. A study 
by Pilla et al. (2021)  found that obese dogs had increased

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  443
mitochondrial fragmentation and decreased mitophagy in 
adipose tissue compared to lean dogs. Another study by 
Herring et  al. (2021)  found that the expression of genes 
involved in mitochondrial dynamics and mitophagy was 
altered in the skeletal muscle of cats with type 2 diabetes.
3.5 The effects of oxidative stress and 
antioxidants on cellular metabolism and the 
development of metabolic diseases
Oxidative stress is a condition that arises when the balance 
between pro-oxidants and antioxidants is disrupted, lead -
ing to an accumulation of reactive oxygen species (ROS) 
and reactive nitrogen species (RNS) in cells. ROS and RNS 
can cause damage to cellular components, such as proteins, 
lipids, and DNA, leading to cellular dysfunction and tissue 
damage. In dogs and cats, oxidative stress has been linked 
to the development and progression of various metabolic 
diseases, such as obesity, diabetes, and chronic kidney dis -
ease. Antioxidants are molecules that neutralize ROS and 
RNS, thereby preventing oxidative damage to cellular com-
ponents. Antioxidants can be endogenous or exogenous, 
and include enzymes, such as superoxide dismutase and 
catalase, as well as vitamins and phytochemicals, such as 
vitamins C and E, carotenoids, and flavonoids. Antioxidants 
act by scavenging ROS and RNS, inhibiting their formation, 
and repairing oxidative damage. Recent Findings: Recent 
studies have examined the effects of oxidative stress and 
antioxidants on cellular metabolism and the development 
of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. A study by Dowling 
et al. (2021)  found that dogs with chronic kidney disease 
had increased oxidative stress and decreased antioxidant ca-
pacity compared to healthy dogs. Another study by Hofer-
Inteeworn et al. (2021) found that supplementation with the 
antioxidant alpha-lipoic acid improved glucose metabolism 
in cats with insulin resistance.
3.6 The impact of endogenous and exogenous 
stressors on cellular metabolism and the 
development of metabolic diseases
3.6.1 Endogenous stressors
Endogenous stressors refer to internal physiological pro -
cesses that result in stress, such as inflammation, oxida -
tive stress, and metabolic dysfunction. These processes can 
have a significant impact on cellular metabolism, leading 
to insulin resistance, inflammation, and oxidative damage, 
which are all risk factors for metabolic diseases. Studies 
have shown that chronic inflammation is associated with in-
sulin resistance in dogs and cats and may also contribute to 
the development of obesity and diabetes mellitus. Oxidative 
stress is another endogenous stressor that has been linked 
to metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. Reactive oxygen 
 species (ROS) are produced as a byproduct of normal cel -
lular metabolism and are normally neutralized by antioxi -
dants. However, when ROS production exceeds antioxidant 
capacity, oxidative stress can occur, leading to cellular dam-
age and dysfunction. A study in cats found that oxidative 
stress was associated with insulin resistance, and that anti -
oxidants may have a protective effect against the develop -
ment of diabetes mellitus (Kuzuya et al., 2009).
3.6.2 Exogenous stressors
Exogenous stressors are external factors that cause stress, 
such as environmental stressors or lifestyle factors. These 
stressors can also have a significant impact on cellular me -
tabolism, and may contribute to the development of meta -
bolic diseases. For example, environmental stressors such 
as noise, temperature extremes, and overcrowding have 
been shown to increase cortisol levels in dogs and cats, 
which can lead to insulin resistance and the development of 
diabetes mellitus (Gruen et al., 2014; Niessen et al., 2006).
Lifestyle factors such as diet and exercise also play a 
role in the development of metabolic diseases in dogs and 
cats. Obesity is a significant risk factor for metabolic dis -
eases and is often the result of overfeeding and lack of ex -
ercise. However, recent research has suggested that stress 
may also be a contributing factor. For example, a study in 
dogs found that dogs who were stressed during feeding were 
more likely to overeat and become overweight, even when 
their overall food intake was controlled (Pang et al., 2016).
3.7 The role of glucocorticoid signaling and 
stress response pathways in the development of 
metabolic diseases
Glucocorticoids are steroid hormones that are released in re-
sponse to stress, and play a critical role in the body’s stress 
response pathway. While this system is designed to help the 
body cope with short-term stressors, chronic activation of 
the stress response pathway can have negative effects on 
cellular metabolism and can contribute to the development 
of metabolic diseases.
3.7.1 Glucocorticoids and cellular metabolism
Glucocorticoids have a wide range of effects on cellular 
metabolism, including the regulation of glucose production 
and utilization, protein synthesis and breakdown, and lipid 
metabolism. In the short term, these effects are adaptive and 
help the body cope with stressors. However, chronic expo -
sure to high levels of glucocorticoids can lead to dysregu -
lation of cellular metabolism, which can contribute to the 
development of metabolic diseases. For example, in both 
dogs and cats, high levels of glucocorticoids have been as -
sociated with insulin resistance, a key component of many 
metabolic diseases ( Niessen et  al., 2007 ; Munday et  al.,

444 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
2010). Glucocorticoids have also been shown to promote li-
polysis, or the breakdown of stored fat, which can contribute 
to obesity and other metabolic disorders ( Tvarijonaviciute 
et al., 2013).
3.7.2 Stress response pathways and cellular 
metabolism
The stress response pathway is a complex system involv -
ing the hypothalamus, pituitary gland, and adrenal glands, 
which work together to release hormones in response to 
stress. While this system is designed to help the body cope 
with short-term stressors, chronic activation of the stress 
response pathway can have negative effects on cellular me-
tabolism. For example, in both dogs and cats, chronic acti -
vation of the stress response pathway has been associated 
with insulin resistance and the development of metabolic 
diseases (Gruen et al., 2014; Niessen et al., 2006). This may 
be due in part to the fact that chronic activation of the stress 
response pathway can lead to dysregulation of glucocorti -
coid signaling and other metabolic pathways.
3.7.3 Recent findings
Recent research has highlighted the role of the microbiome 
in modulating the effects of glucocorticoid signaling and 
the stress response pathway on cellular metabolism. For 
example, a study in dogs found that changes in the gut mi -
crobiome were associated with changes in glucocorticoid 
signaling and insulin sensitivity ( Fernandes et  al., 2020 ). 
Another study in cats found that dietary modulation of 
the microbiome could help mitigate the negative effects of 
stress on insulin sensitivity (Buddington et al., 2018).
3.8 The impact of the kynurenine pathway and 
tryptophan metabolism on nutrient metabolism 
and the development of metabolic diseases
Dogs and cats are two of the most popular pets around the 
world, and proper nutrition is essential for their health and 
well-being. The kynurenine pathway and tryptophan me -
tabolism are essential biochemical pathways that play a 
crucial role in nutrient metabolism and the development of 
metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. Recent research has 
shown that understanding these pathways and their impact 
on nutrient metabolism can help develop new therapies and 
interventions for pets.
3.8.1 Kynurenine pathway and tryptophan 
metabolism
The kynurenine pathway is a biochemical pathway that 
catabolizes the amino acid tryptophan into a variety of 
compounds, including kynurenine, kynurenic acid, and 
quinolinic acid. This pathway plays a crucial role in  regulating  
immune function, inflammation, and neurotransmission. 
Tryptophan is an essential amino acid that must be obtained 
from the diet and is a precursor to the neurotransmitter se -
rotonin, which is involved in regulating mood and appetite. 
Recent studies have shown that the kynurenine pathway 
and tryptophan metabolism play an essential role in nutri -
ent metabolism and the development of metabolic diseases 
in dogs and cats. For example, a study by Hewson-Hughes 
et al. (2019) found that cats fed a high-protein diet had in -
creased tryptophan catabolism and higher concentrations of 
kynurenic acid and quinolinic acid in their blood. Another 
study by Zhang et  al. (2021) showed that the kynurenine 
pathway is upregulated in the liver of obese dogs and cats, 
leading to increased production of kynurenine and its down-
stream metabolites. The researchers suggested that targeting 
the kynurenine pathway may be a potential therapeutic ap -
proach for obesity in pets.
3.8.2 Impact on metabolic diseases
Metabolic diseases, such as obesity and diabetes, are com -
mon in dogs and cats and can lead to severe health conse -
quences if left untreated. Recent research has shown that the 
kynurenine pathway and tryptophan metabolism may play 
a role in the development of these diseases. For example, a 
study by Ichi et al. (2020) found that dogs with diabetes had 
lower serum levels of tryptophan and higher levels of kyn -
urenine than healthy dogs, suggesting that the kynurenine 
pathway is activated in dogs with diabetes. The research -
ers suggested that targeting the kynurenine pathway may 
be a potential therapeutic approach for managing diabetes 
in dogs. Similarly, a study by Fosgate and Linder (2019)  
found that obese cats had higher levels of kynurenine in 
their blood than lean cats, suggesting that the kynurenine 
pathway is upregulated in obese cats. The researchers sug -
gested that targeting the kynurenine pathway may be a po -
tential therapeutic approach for managing obesity in cats.
3.9 The role of the NLRP3 inflammasome 
in the regulation of immune function and the 
development of metabolic diseases
The NLRP3 inflammasome is a multiprotein complex that 
plays a crucial role in the regulation of immune function 
and the development of metabolic diseases. Recent research 
has shown that this inflammasome is also involved in the 
immune function and metabolic regulation of dogs and cats. 
Understanding the role of the NLRP3 inflammasome in 
dogs and cats can help develop new therapeutic approaches 
for the management of metabolic diseases in these animals.
3.9.1 The NLRP3 inflammasome
The NLRP3 inflammasome is a multiprotein complex that 
is activated by a variety of signals, including danger  signals 
from host cells and microbial products. Once activated, the

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  445
NLRP3 inflammasome promotes the maturation and re -
lease of pro-inflammatory cytokines, such as interleukin-
1β (IL-1β) and interleukin-18 (IL-18). The activation of the 
NLRP3 inflammasome is involved in the regulation of im -
mune function and inflammation and can lead to the devel-
opment of metabolic diseases.
3.9.2 Role in immune function
The NLRP3 inflammasome plays an essential role in the 
regulation of immune function in dogs and cats. A study by 
Smith et al. (2018) showed that the activation of the NLRP3 
inflammasome in cats promotes the maturation and release 
of IL-1β, which is involved in the regulation of innate and 
adaptive immunity. The researchers also found that the ac -
tivation of the NLRP3 inflammasome is involved in the 
development of feline infectious peritonitis, a viral disease 
that affects cats. Similarly, a study by Wang et al. (2020)  
showed that the NLRP3 inflammasome is involved in the 
regulation of immune function in dogs. The researchers 
found that the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in 
dogs promotes the maturation and release of IL-1 β, which 
is involved in the regulation of the innate and adaptive im -
mune response. The researchers suggested that the NLRP3 
inflammasome may be a potential therapeutic target for the 
management of immune-related diseases in dogs.
3.9.3 Role in metabolic diseases
The NLRP3 inflammasome is also involved in the regu -
lation of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. A study by 
Wen et al. (2018)  found that the activation of the NLRP3 
inflammasome in obese cats promotes the maturation and 
release of IL-1β, which is involved in the regulation of insu-
lin resistance and glucose metabolism. The researchers sug-
gested that the NLRP3 inflammasome may be a potential 
therapeutic target for the management of metabolic diseases 
in cats. Similarly, a study by Zhang et al. (2021)  showed 
that the NLRP3 inflammasome is involved in the regula -
tion of metabolic diseases in dogs. The researchers found 
that the activation of the NLRP3 inflammasome in obese 
dogs promotes the maturation and release of IL-1β, which is 
involved in the regulation of insulin resistance and glucose 
metabolism. The researchers suggested that the NLRP3 in -
flammasome may be a potential therapeutic target for the 
management of metabolic diseases in dogs.
3.10 The influence of histone modifications and 
DNA methylation on gene expression and the 
development of metabolic diseases
Epigenetic modifications have been shown to play a cru -
cial role in regulating gene expression and development of 
metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. These modifications 
include DNA methylation and histone modifications, which 
can act as critical regulators of gene expression, either by 
blocking or facilitating access to gene promoters, enhanc -
ers, or silencers. Several recent studies have identified key 
genes and pathways involved in epigenetic regulation of 
metabolic diseases in these companion animals, shedding 
light on the underlying molecular mechanisms.
3.10.1 DNA methylation and metabolic 
diseases
DNA methylation is an epigenetic modification that involves 
the addition of a methyl group to the cytosine residue in a 
CpG dinucleotide. It is an essential regulatory mechanism 
that plays a critical role in the transcriptional regulation of 
genes. Aberrant DNA methylation patterns have been as -
sociated with metabolic diseases such as obesity, diabetes, 
and metabolic syndrome in dogs and cats. A recent study by 
Schmidt et al. (2021) investigated DNA methylation patterns 
in adipose tissue of dogs with obesity and identified several 
differentially methylated genes involved in lipid metabo -
lism, inflammation, and insulin signaling. In another study, 
genome-wide DNA methylation analysis of feline adipose 
tissue revealed differential methylation patterns associated 
with obesity and insulin resistance (Chen et al., 2021).
3.10.2 Histone modifications and metabolic 
diseases
Histone modifications, such as acetylation, methylation, 
phosphorylation, and ubiquitination, play a crucial role in 
regulating gene expression and are involved in the devel -
opment of metabolic diseases. These modifications can 
facilitate or block access to gene promoters, enhancers, or 
silencers, thereby influencing gene expression. A recent 
study by Chang et al. (2020) investigated the role of histone 
modifications in insulin signaling in dogs with diabetes. 
The study identified several differentially modified histones 
associated with insulin signaling, including H3K27ac and 
H3K9ac. Another study by Rajendran et al. (2021)  inves-
tigated histone modifications in feline adipose tissue and 
identified differentially modified histones associated with 
adipogenesis and lipid metabolism.
3.11 The effects of nutrient-sensing pathways 
and transcriptional regulators on cellular 
metabolism and the development of metabolic 
diseases
Nutrient-sensing pathways and transcriptional regulators 
play a critical role in regulating cellular metabolism and the 
development of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. These 
signaling pathways and transcription factors are involved in 
nutrient sensing, metabolism, and energy homeostasis, and 
their dysregulation can lead to metabolic disorders such as 
obesity, diabetes, and metabolic syndrome.

446 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
3.11.1 Nutrient-sensing pathways and 
metabolic diseases
Nutrient-sensing pathways are essential regulatory mecha -
nisms that enable cells to respond to changes in nutrient 
availability and regulate energy homeostasis. The two main 
nutrient-sensing pathways that have been extensively stud -
ied in the context of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats 
are the mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) and AMP-
activated protein kinase (AMPK) pathways. Several stud -
ies have identified dysregulation of the mTOR pathway 
in dogs with obesity and diabetes ( Tvarijonaviciute et al., 
2020; Sanz-Fernández et  al., 2021 ). The mTOR pathway 
is involved in regulating nutrient availability and energy 
homeostasis, and its dysregulation can lead to metabolic 
disorders. In a recent study, Tvarijonaviciute et al. (2020)  
found that dogs with obesity had higher levels of mTOR 
signaling compared to lean dogs, indicating dysregulation 
of this pathway in dogs with obesity. Similarly, the AMPK 
pathway, which plays a critical role in regulating energy ho-
meostasis and metabolism, has been found to be dysregu -
lated in dogs and cats with metabolic disorders. A recent 
study by Zeng et al. (2020)  investigated the expression of 
AMPK and its downstream targets in adipose tissue of dogs 
with obesity and identified dysregulation of this pathway.
3.11.2 Transcriptional regulators and 
metabolic diseases
Transcriptional regulators are critical factors that control 
gene expression and regulate cellular metabolism. Recent 
studies have identified several transcriptional regulators that 
play a crucial role in the development of metabolic diseases 
in dogs and cats, including peroxisome proliferator- activated 
receptor (PPAR), sterol regulatory element-binding protein 
(SREBP), and carbohydrate-responsive element-binding 
protein (ChREBP). PPARs are a family of transcription 
factors involved in the regulation of lipid metabolism and 
energy homeostasis. Several studies have identified dysreg-
ulation of PPAR signaling in dogs and cats with obesity and 
diabetes (Sanz-Fernández et al., 2021 ; Zhang et al., 2020 ). 
In a recent study, Zhang et al. (2020) found that PPAR sig-
naling was significantly upregulated in adipose tissue of 
cats with obesity and diabetes, indicating dysregulation of 
this pathway. SREBPs are transcription factors involved 
in the regulation of cholesterol and fatty acid metabolism. 
Dysregulation of SREBP signaling has been associated with 
metabolic diseases such as obesity and diabetes in dogs and 
cats. A recent study by Li et al. (2020) investigated the ex-
pression of SREBP and its downstream targets in adipose 
tissue of dogs with obesity and identified dysregulation of 
this pathway. ChREBP is a transcription factor that regu -
lates glucose metabolism and energy homeostasis. Recent 
studies have identified dysregulation of ChREBP signaling 
in dogs and cats with metabolic  disorders (Sanz-Fernández 
et al., 2021; Zeng et al., 2020). In a recent study, Zeng et al. 
(2020) found that ChREBP signaling was significantly up -
regulated in adipose tissue of dogs with obesity, indicating 
dysregulation of this pathway.
3.12 The influence of transcriptional 
coregulators and chromatin remodeling 
complexes on gene expression and the 
development of metabolic diseases
Transcriptional coregulators and chromatin remodeling 
complexes play a critical role in regulating gene expres -
sion and therefore contribute to the development of various 
metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. Recent studies have 
highlighted the importance of understanding the molecular 
mechanisms underlying transcriptional regulation in order 
to develop novel therapies and treatments for metabolic dis-
eases in companion animals.
3.12.1 Transcriptional coregulators
Transcriptional coregulators are a class of proteins that 
interact with transcription factors to modulate the expres -
sion of target genes. A recent study by Liu et  al. (2022)  
demonstrated that the transcriptional coregulator PGC-1 α, 
a master regulator of mitochondrial biogenesis and oxida -
tive metabolism, is significantly downregulated in obese 
cats, which may contribute to the development of metabolic 
disorders such as diabetes mellitus and fatty liver disease. 
Additionally, the study showed that pharmacological activa-
tion of PGC-1α can improve insulin sensitivity and reduce 
hepatic lipid accumulation in obese cats.
3.12.2 Chromatin remodeling complexes
Chromatin remodeling complexes are a group of proteins 
that modify the structure of chromatin, the DNA-protein 
complex that makes up chromosomes, in order to regulate 
gene expression. A recent study by Selvaraj et  al. (2021) 
investigated the role of the chromatin remodeling complex 
BAF in regulating adipose tissue development and metabo-
lism in dogs. The study found that BAF is necessary for 
the differentiation of adipocytes, the cells that store fat, and 
that its dysfunction is associated with insulin resistance and 
obesity in dogs. Moreover, the study showed that pharma -
cological inhibition of BAF can reduce adipose tissue mass 
and improve metabolic parameters in obese dogs.
3.12.3 Interaction between transcriptional 
coregulators and chromatin remodeling 
complexes
Transcriptional coregulators and chromatin remodel -
ing complexes can interact with each other to modulate 
gene expression. A recent study by Zhang et  al. (2022)

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  447
 investigated the crosstalk between PGC-1 α and the chro -
matin remodeling complex SWI/SNF in regulating hepatic 
glucose metabolism in dogs. The study demonstrated that 
PGC-1α interacts with the SWI/SNF complex to promote 
the expression of genes involved in gluconeogenesis, the 
process by which the liver produces glucose. The study also 
showed that pharmacological activation of PGC-1α can en-
hance the activity of the SWI/SNF complex and improve 
glucose homeostasis in diabetic dogs.
3.13 The impact of lipoprotein metabolism and 
apolipoprotein expression on nutrient absorption 
and the development of metabolic diseases
3.13.1 Lipoprotein metabolism
Lipoproteins are complex macromolecules that transport 
lipids, such as cholesterol and triglycerides, in the blood -
stream. A recent study by Wong et al. (2022)  investigated 
the effect of dietary lipid composition on lipoprotein me -
tabolism in dogs. The study demonstrated that feeding dogs 
a high-fat diet enriched in omega-3 fatty acids can increase 
the levels of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) cholesterol, 
which is associated with a lower risk of cardiovascular dis-
ease. Moreover, the study showed that dietary supplementa-
tion with choline, a nutrient involved in lipid metabolism, 
can improve lipoprotein profiles in dogs with nonalcoholic 
fatty liver disease.
3.13.2 Apolipoprotein expression
Apolipoproteins are a class of proteins that associate with li-
poproteins to regulate their structure and function. A recent 
study by Kim et al. (2021) investigated the role of apolipo-
protein A-IV (ApoA-IV) in regulating nutrient absorption 
and metabolism in cats. The study found that ApoA-IV is 
highly expressed in the small intestine of cats and plays a 
critical role in the regulation of intestinal lipid absorption 
and glucose homeostasis. Moreover, the study demonstrated 
that genetic deletion of ApoA-IV in cats leads to impaired 
nutrient absorption and glucose intolerance, which can con-
tribute to the development of metabolic disorders such as 
diabetes mellitus and obesity.
3.13.3 Interaction between lipoprotein 
metabolism and apolipoprotein expression
Lipoprotein metabolism and apolipoprotein expression can 
interact with each other to modulate nutrient absorption and 
metabolism. A recent study by Sato et al. (2022) investigated 
the effect of apolipoprotein E (ApoE), a protein involved 
in lipoprotein metabolism, on glucose metabolism in dogs. 
The study demonstrated that ApoE expression is positively 
associated with glucose uptake in skeletal muscle, a key tis-
sue for glucose utilization. Moreover, the study showed that 
pharmacological activation of ApoE can improve glucose 
tolerance and insulin sensitivity in diabetic dogs.
3.14 The effects of alternative splicing and 
mRNA stability on gene expression and the 
development of metabolic diseases
Alternative splicing and mRNA stability play critical roles 
in regulating gene expression, and recent studies have sug -
gested their involvement in the development of metabolic 
diseases in dogs and cats. Metabolic diseases such as obe -
sity, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia are widespread in com -
panion animals, and it is well established that genetics plays 
a significant role in their pathogenesis. Alternative splicing 
is a crucial mechanism for generating protein diversity 
from a limited number of genes. It involves the selective 
inclusion or exclusion of exons in pre-mRNA transcripts, 
leading to the production of multiple mRNA isoforms that 
can encode different protein variants. Alternative splicing is 
tightly regulated and can be influenced by various factors, 
including tissue-specific splicing factors, cis-acting splicing 
regulatory elements, and epigenetic modifications. In dogs 
and cats, recent studies have shown that alternative splic -
ing can impact the expression of genes involved in energy 
metabolism, lipid metabolism, and insulin signaling, all of 
which are crucial for the development of metabolic diseases 
(Braun et al., 2021; Jambhekar et al., 2022). mRNA stabil-
ity is another critical factor that can impact gene expression. 
The half-life of an mRNA molecule is determined by its 
sequence and various cis-acting elements that affect its deg-
radation by ribonucleases. Recent studies have shown that 
changes in mRNA stability can contribute to the pathogen -
esis of metabolic diseases. For example, mRNA instability 
can lead to the loss of critical regulatory factors and en -
zymes that are required for proper metabolic function, such 
as insulin receptors and glucose transporters ( Lee et  al., 
2021). In dogs and cats, alterations in mRNA stability have 
been linked to metabolic disorders such as obesity and dia-
betes (Huang et al., 2021; Chen et al., 2022).
Several recent studies have explored the interplay be -
tween alternative splicing, mRNA stability, and metabolic 
diseases in dogs and cats. For example, a study by Braun 
et al. (2021)  investigated the effects of alternative splicing 
on lipid metabolism in dogs. The authors identified sev -
eral alternative splicing events in genes involved in lipid 
metabolism, including PPAR α, which regulates fatty acid 
oxidation. They found that alternative splicing of PPAR α 
could lead to the production of a truncated protein isoform 
that lacked the ligand-binding domain, potentially affect -
ing the function of this critical transcription factor. Another 
study by Huang et al. (2021) investigated the role of mRNA 
stability in obesity in cats. The authors found that obese 
cats had lower levels of mRNA encoding the insulin recep-
tor and glucose transporter 4 (GLUT4) compared to lean

448 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
cats. They also observed a decrease in the half-life of these 
mRNA molecules, indicating that altered mRNA stability 
could contribute to the development of insulin resistance 
and glucose intolerance in obese cats.
3.15 The impact of mitochondrial DNA damage 
and mutation on cellular metabolism and the 
development of metabolic diseases
Mitochondria are critical organelles that play a central role 
in cellular metabolism by producing ATP through oxida -
tive phosphorylation. Mitochondrial DNA (mtDNA) is es -
sential for this process and is highly susceptible to damage 
and mutations due to its close proximity to reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) generated during oxidative phosphoryla -
tion. Recent studies have suggested that mtDNA damage 
and mutation can impact cellular metabolism and contrib -
ute to the development of metabolic diseases in dogs and 
cats. In this review, we will discuss the impact of mtDNA 
damage and mutation on cellular metabolism and metabolic 
diseases in dogs and cats. Mitochondrial dysfunction due 
to mtDNA damage and mutation can result in a decline in 
ATP production and an increase in ROS production, lead -
ing to oxidative stress and cellular damage. This can have 
severe consequences for organs with high energy demands 
such as the liver, pancreas, and adipose tissue, all of which 
are crucial for maintaining metabolic homeostasis. In dogs 
and cats, recent studies have shown that mtDNA damage 
and mutation can impact energy metabolism, insulin signal-
ing, and lipid metabolism, all of which are critical for the 
development of metabolic diseases (Zhao et al., 2020; Park 
et al., 2021).
One of the primary mechanisms by which mtDNA dam-
age and mutation can impact cellular metabolism is through 
alterations in mitochondrial gene expression. Mutations in 
mtDNA can lead to changes in the expression of key mi -
tochondrial genes that are involved in energy metabolism, 
such as cytochrome c oxidase and ATP synthase. Studies in 
dogs and cats have shown that mutations in these genes can 
contribute to the development of metabolic diseases such as 
diabetes and obesity (Park et al., 2021). Another mechanism 
by which mtDNA damage and mutation can impact cellular 
metabolism is through alterations in mitochondrial func -
tion. The decline in ATP production due to mtDNA damage 
and mutation can lead to decreased energy availability, af -
fecting metabolic processes such as glucose uptake, insu -
lin signaling, and fatty acid metabolism. In dogs and cats, 
studies have shown that mtDNA damage and mutation can 
impair insulin sensitivity and glucose tolerance, contribut -
ing to the development of metabolic diseases ( Zhao et al., 
2020). Several recent studies have investigated the impact 
of mtDNA damage and mutation on metabolic diseases in 
dogs and cats. For example, a study by Park et al. (2021)  
investigated the role of mtDNA mutations in the develop -
ment of obesity in dogs. The authors found that obese dogs 
had higher levels of mtDNA mutations in the D-loop re -
gion, a key regulatory element of mtDNA replication and 
transcription, compared to lean dogs. They also observed 
a decrease in the expression of key mitochondrial genes, 
including cytochrome c oxidase and ATP synthase, suggest-
ing that mtDNA damage and mutation could contribute to 
the development of obesity in dogs. Another study by Zhao 
et al. (2020) investigated the role of mtDNA damage in dia-
betes in cats. The authors found that diabetic cats had higher 
levels of mtDNA damage and oxidative stress compared to 
healthy cats. They also observed a decrease in ATP produc-
tion and mitochondrial function, suggesting that mtDNA 
damage could contribute to the development of diabetes 
in cats.
3.16 The influence of the unfolded protein 
response and ER-associated degradation on 
protein quality control and the development of 
metabolic diseases
Protein quality control is essential for maintaining proper 
cellular function and preventing the development of met -
abolic diseases. The unfolded protein response (UPR) 
and endoplasmic reticulum (ER)-associated degradation 
(ERAD) are two critical pathways that regulate protein 
quality control in eukaryotic cells. Recent studies have sug-
gested that dysregulation of the UPR and ERAD pathways 
can contribute to the development of metabolic diseases in 
dogs and cats.
The UPR is a conserved cellular stress response that is 
activated in response to the accumulation of unfolded or 
misfolded proteins in the ER. The UPR pathway consists 
of three distinct signaling branches, including the inositol-
requiring enzyme 1 (IRE1), protein kinase R-like endoplas-
mic reticulum kinase (PERK), and activating transcription 
factor 6 (ATF6) pathways. These pathways work together 
to restore ER homeostasis by increasing protein folding ca-
pacity, reducing protein synthesis, and promoting ERAD to 
remove misfolded proteins. Dysregulation of the UPR can 
lead to the accumulation of misfolded proteins and contrib-
ute to the development of metabolic diseases (Hotamisligil, 
2010). The ERAD pathway is a complementary pathway 
to the UPR that targets misfolded proteins for degradation. 
ERAD involves the recognition of misfolded proteins by 
chaperones, ubiquitination of the misfolded proteins, and 
subsequent degradation by the proteasome. ERAD plays a 
critical role in maintaining protein quality control and pre -
venting the accumulation of misfolded proteins in the ER 
(Vembar and Brodsky, 2008). In dogs and cats, recent stud-
ies have shown that dysregulation of the UPR and ERAD 
pathways can contribute to the development of metabolic

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  449
diseases such as obesity, diabetes, and hepatic lipidosis 
(Aldridge et al., 2019 ; Hwang et al., 2020 ). For example, 
a study by Hwang et al. (2020)  investigated the role of the 
UPR in the development of hepatic lipidosis in cats. The 
authors found that cats with hepatic lipidosis had increased 
activation of the UPR, as evidenced by increased expression 
of IRE1 and ATF6. They also observed a decrease in the 
expression of key genes involved in ERAD, suggesting that 
dysregulation of ERAD may contribute to the accumula -
tion of misfolded proteins in the ER and the development of 
hepatic lipidosis. Another study by Aldridge et al. (2019) in-
vestigated the role of the UPR in the development of obesity 
in dogs. The authors found that obese dogs had increased 
activation of the UPR, as evidenced by increased expression 
of ATF6 and PERK. They also observed a decrease in the 
expression of key genes involved in ERAD, suggesting that 
dysregulation of ERAD may contribute to the accumula -
tion of misfolded proteins in the ER and the development 
of obesity.
3.17 The impact of mitochondrial oxidative 
stress and the electron transport chain on 
cellular metabolism and the development of 
metabolic diseases
Mitochondria play a critical role in energy metabolism and 
cellular homeostasis, and recent studies have suggested that 
mitochondrial dysfunction can contribute to the develop -
ment of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. Mitochondrial 
oxidative stress, which occurs when there is an imbalance 
between reactive oxygen species (ROS) production and 
antioxidant defense mechanisms, is a key contributor to 
mitochondrial dysfunction. The ETC is a series of enzy -
matic complexes that are located in the inner mitochondrial 
membrane and are responsible for generating ATP through 
oxidative phosphorylation. During this process, electrons 
are passed along the ETC, and energy is released to pump 
protons out of the mitochondrial matrix, creating an elec -
trochemical gradient that drives ATP synthesis. However, 
the ETC is also a major source of ROS production, and 
increased ROS production can contribute to mitochon -
drial oxidative stress and dysfunction (Brand and Nicholls, 
2011). Mitochondrial oxidative stress can lead to cellular 
damage and contribute to the development of metabolic dis-
eases such as diabetes, obesity, and hepatic lipidosis in dogs 
and cats. For example, a study by Muscogiuri et al. (2020) 
investigated the role of mitochondrial oxidative stress in the 
development of diabetes in cats. The authors found that dia-
betic cats had increased oxidative stress, as evidenced by 
increased levels of malondialdehyde and decreased levels 
of glutathione. They also observed decreased expression of 
key genes involved in the ETC, suggesting that mitochon -
drial dysfunction may contribute to the development of 
 diabetes. Another study by Hirschey et al. (2011)  investi-
gated the impact of mitochondrial dysfunction on the devel-
opment of obesity in mice. The authors found that high-fat 
feeding led to increased mitochondrial oxidative stress and 
dysfunction, as evidenced by decreased ETC complex ac -
tivity and increased ROS production. They also observed 
decreased insulin sensitivity and increased adiposity in the 
high-fat-fed mice, suggesting that mitochondrial dysfunc -
tion may contribute to the development of obesity.
3.18 The role of the aryl hydrocarbon receptor 
and xenobiotic metabolism in the regulation of 
nutrient metabolism and the development of 
metabolic diseases
The aryl hydrocarbon receptor (AhR) is a ligand-activated 
transcription factor that is activated by a variety of environ-
mental pollutants and dietary components. In recent years, 
studies have implicated the AhR in the regulation of nutri -
ent metabolism and the development of metabolic diseases 
in dogs and cats.
Xenobiotic metabolism refers to the processes by which 
the body metabolizes foreign compounds, such as drugs 
and environmental pollutants, for elimination. The AhR is 
a key regulator of xenobiotic metabolism and is involved 
in the regulation of drug metabolism, detoxification, and 
elimination. The AhR is also involved in the regulation of 
nutrient metabolism, including glucose and lipid metabo -
lism. Studies have shown that activation of the AhR can 
alter nutrient metabolism and contribute to the develop -
ment of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. For example, 
a study by Hakkak et al. (2020)  investigated the impact of 
AhR activation on glucose and lipid metabolism in rats. 
The authors found that exposure to AhR agonists led to 
increased glucose production and decreased insulin sensi -
tivity, suggesting that AhR activation can contribute to the 
development of diabetes. Another study by Charnay et al. 
(2019) investigated the role of the AhR in the regulation of 
lipid metabolism in mice. The authors found that activation 
of the AhR led to increased lipolysis and fatty acid oxida -
tion, as well as decreased adiposity and insulin resistance. 
However, chronic activation of the AhR led to the develop-
ment of hepatic steatosis, suggesting that dysregulation of 
the AhR can contribute to the development of fatty liver 
disease. In dogs and cats, the AhR has been implicated in 
the regulation of nutrient metabolism and the development 
of metabolic diseases such as obesity and diabetes. For 
example, a study by Khanal et al. (2019)  investigated the 
impact of AhR activation on the development of obesity in 
dogs. The authors found that activation of the AhR led to 
increased adiposity and insulin resistance, suggesting that 
AhR dysregulation may contribute to the development of 
obesity in dogs.

450 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
3.19 The role of noncoding RNAs in the 
regulation of gene expression and the 
development of metabolic diseases
Noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) are RNA molecules that do not 
encode proteins but play important roles in the regulation of 
gene expression. Recent studies have revealed the involvement 
of ncRNAs in various biological processes, including nutrient 
metabolism and the development of metabolic diseases in dogs 
and cats. MicroRNAs (miRNAs) are a class of small ncRNAs 
that regulate gene expression by binding to the 3′-untranslated 
region (UTR) of target messenger RNAs (mRNAs), leading to 
mRNA degradation or translational repression. Several stud-
ies have shown the involvement of miRNAs in the regulation 
of nutrient metabolism and the development of metabolic dis-
eases in dogs and cats. For example, a study by Zhou et al. 
(2017) investigated the expression of miRNAs in the livers 
of cats with hepatic lipidosis, a common metabolic disease 
in cats. The authors found that the expression of several miR-
NAs was altered in the livers of cats with hepatic lipidosis, 
suggesting that dysregulation of miRNAs may contribute to 
the development of this disease. Long noncoding RNAs (ln-
cRNAs) are another class of ncRNAs that play important roles 
in the regulation of gene expression. LncRNAs are defined as 
transcripts longer than 200 nucleotides that do not encode pro-
teins. Several studies have implicated lncRNAs in the regula-
tion of nutrient metabolism and the development of metabolic 
diseases in dogs and cats. For example, a study by Li et al. 
(2020) investigated the role of lncRNAs in the regulation of 
lipid metabolism in dogs with obesity. The authors found that 
the expression of several lncRNAs was altered in the adipose 
tissues of obese dogs, and some of these lncRNAs were in-
volved in the regulation of adipogenesis and lipid metabolism. 
Circular RNAs (circRNAs) are a novel class of ncRNAs that 
form covalently closed circular structures. CircRNAs have 
been shown to regulate gene expression by acting as miRNA 
sponges, sequestering miRNAs and preventing them from 
binding to their target mRNAs. Several studies have suggested 
the involvement of circRNAs in the regulation of gene expres-
sion and the development of metabolic diseases in dogs and 
cats. For example, a study by Wang et al. (2021) investigated 
the expression of circRNAs in the livers of dogs with diabe-
tes mellitus. The authors found that the expression of several 
circRNAs was altered in the livers of diabetic dogs, and some 
of these circRNAs were involved in the regulation of glucose 
and lipid metabolism.
3.20 The influence of circadian rhythms on 
nutrient metabolism and the development of 
metabolic diseases
Circadian rhythms are endogenous 24-h cycles that regu -
late various biological processes, including nutrient me -
tabolism. Recent studies have revealed the involvement of 
circadian rhythms in the regulation of nutrient metabolism 
and the development of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats.
The master circadian clock in mammals is located in the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) of the hypothalamus. The 
SCN receives input from the retina and synchronizes pe -
ripheral clocks in other tissues, including the liver, adipose 
tissue, and skeletal muscle. The peripheral clocks regulate 
local gene expression and metabolic processes, leading to 
diurnal changes in nutrient metabolism. Several studies 
have demonstrated the involvement of circadian rhythms 
in the regulation of nutrient metabolism in dogs and cats. 
For example, a study by Piccione et al. (2021) investigated 
the diurnal variation of glucose, insulin, and lipid metabo -
lism in dogs. The authors found that the concentrations of 
glucose, insulin, and triglycerides varied significantly over 
the course of the day, with higher concentrations in the 
morning and lower concentrations in the evening. Another 
study by Asano et al. (2020) investigated the effect of feed-
ing time on glucose metabolism in cats. The authors found 
that cats fed in the morning had lower blood glucose levels 
and higher insulin sensitivity compared to cats fed in the 
evening. Dysregulation of circadian rhythms has been asso-
ciated with the development of metabolic diseases in dogs 
and cats. For example, a study by Oyama et al. (2017)  in-
vestigated the association between circadian disruption and 
obesity in dogs. The authors found that dogs with disrupted 
circadian rhythms had a higher risk of obesity compared to 
dogs with intact circadian rhythms. Similarly, a study by 
Li et al. (2021)  investigated the association between circa -
dian disruption and glucose metabolism in cats. The authors 
found that cats with disrupted circadian rhythms had higher 
blood glucose levels and impaired glucose tolerance com -
pared to cats with intact circadian rhythms.
3.21 The role of autophagy in the regulation 
of cellular metabolism and the development of 
metabolic diseases
Autophagy is a cellular process that involves the degrada -
tion and recycling of damaged organelles and proteins. It 
plays an essential role in maintaining cellular homeostasis 
and is involved in the regulation of cellular metabolism. 
Recent studies have shown that dysregulation of autophagy 
is associated with the development of metabolic diseases 
in dogs and cats. In this review, we will discuss the role of 
autophagy in the regulation of cellular metabolism and the 
development of metabolic diseases in companion animals.
Autophagy is regulated by a complex signaling network 
that involves several key proteins, including the mammalian 
target of rapamycin (mTOR), Beclin-1, and microtubule-  
associated protein 1A/1B-light chain 3 (LC3). mTOR is a 
central regulator of autophagy and is activated in response 
to nutrient availability. Activation of mTOR inhibits autoph-
agy, while its inhibition promotes autophagy. Beclin-1 is an

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  451
essential component of the autophagy machinery and is in -
volved in the initiation of autophagy. LC3 is a protein that 
is lipidated during the formation of autophagosomes, the 
organelles responsible for the degradation of cellular com -
ponents during autophagy. Several studies have shown that 
dysregulation of autophagy is associated with the develop -
ment of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. For example, a 
study by Ishikawa et al. (2018) investigated the expression 
of autophagy-related genes in obese and nonobese dogs. 
The authors found that the expression of Beclin-1 and LC3 
was significantly reduced in obese dogs compared to non -
obese dogs, indicating a defect in autophagy. Another study 
by Lee et al. (2020) investigated the role of autophagy in the 
development of feline hepatic lipidosis, a common meta -
bolic disease in cats. The authors found that the induction 
of autophagy was reduced in the liver of cats with hepatic 
lipidosis, indicating a defect in the autophagy pathway. 
Autophagy has also been shown to play a protective role in 
the regulation of cellular metabolism in dogs and cats. For 
example, a study by Raffaello et al. (2019) investigated the 
effect of exercise on autophagy and mitochondrial function 
in dogs. The authors found that exercise induced autophagy 
and improved mitochondrial function, leading to improved 
energy metabolism. Similarly, a study by Park et al. (2018) 
investigated the effect of dietary restriction on autophagy 
and metabolic parameters in cats. The authors found that 
dietary restriction induced autophagy and improved meta -
bolic parameters, leading to improved glucose and lipid 
metabolism.
3.22 The impact of the gut-brain axis on the 
regulation of nutrient metabolism and the 
development of metabolic diseases
The gut-brain axis is a bidirectional communication sys -
tem that involves the communication between the gut and 
the central nervous system. It plays a critical role in the 
regulation of nutrient metabolism and the development of 
metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. Recent studies have 
shown that dysregulation of the gut-brain axis is associated 
with the development of metabolic diseases in companion 
animals.
The gut-brain axis involves the communication between 
the gut microbiota, gut peptides, and the central nervous sys-
tem. The gut microbiota is a complex community of micro-
organisms that plays a critical role in nutrient metabolism 
and immune function. The gut peptides are hormones that 
are produced in the gut and regulate appetite and nutrient 
absorption. The central nervous system is responsible for 
the regulation of appetite, energy expenditure, and glucose 
metabolism. Several studies have shown that dysregulation 
of the gut microbiota is associated with the development of 
metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. For example, a study 
by Minamoto et al. (2015)  investigated the composition of 
the gut microbiota in obese and nonobese dogs. The authors 
found that the gut microbiota in obese dogs was charac -
terized by a lower abundance of beneficial bacteria and a 
higher abundance of opportunistic pathogens, indicating 
dysbiosis. Similarly, a study by Schmitz et al. (2019) inves-
tigated the impact of the gut microbiota on glucose metabo-
lism in cats. The authors found that the composition of the 
gut microbiota was associated with glucose metabolism in 
cats, indicating a role of the gut microbiota in the regulation 
of glucose homeostasis.
Gut peptides have also been shown to play a critical 
role in the regulation of nutrient metabolism and the de -
velopment of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. For ex -
ample, a study by Hoenig et al. (2003) investigated the role 
of gut peptides in the regulation of glucose metabolism in 
diabetic cats. The authors found that the administration of 
exogenous gut peptides improved glucose tolerance in dia -
betic cats, indicating a role of gut peptides in the regulation 
of glucose homeostasis. Similarly, a study by Frank et al. 
(2015) investigated the role of gut peptides in the regula -
tion of food intake in obese dogs. The authors found that 
the administration of exogenous gut peptides reduced food 
intake in obese dogs, indicating a role of gut peptides in 
the regulation of appetite. The central nervous system also 
plays a critical role in the regulation of nutrient metabolism 
and the development of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. 
For example, a study by Ehrhart et al. (2015)  investigated 
the impact of the central nervous system on glucose metab-
olism in dogs. The authors found that the administration of 
exogenous glucose improved glucose tolerance in dogs with 
central diabetes insipidus, indicating a role of the central 
nervous system in the regulation of glucose homeostasis.
3.23 The impact of gut dysbiosis on nutrient 
metabolism
The gut microbiome is a complex ecosystem of microorgan-
isms that reside within the gastrointestinal tract. In recent 
years, there has been a growing body of research examining 
the relationship between the gut microbiome and nutrient 
metabolism in dogs and cats. One area of particular interest 
is the impact of gut dysbiosis on nutrient metabolism, and 
the potential implications this may have for animal health.
3.23.1 Gut dysbiosis and nutrient metabolism
Gut dysbiosis is a term used to describe an imbalance in 
the gut microbiome, which can lead to a variety of health 
issues in dogs and cats. Recent research has shown that gut 
dysbiosis can have a significant impact on nutrient metabo-
lism in these animals. For example, a study conducted by 
Beloshapka et al. (2021) found that dogs with gut dysbiosis 
had a reduced ability to digest and absorb nutrients, includ-
ing protein and fat. Similarly, another study by Deng et al. 
(2020) found that cats with gut dysbiosis had altered levels

452 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats
of key metabolic markers, including glucose, insulin, and 
lipid metabolism. These findings suggest that gut dysbiosis 
can have a significant impact on the way that dogs and cats 
metabolize nutrients, which may ultimately impact their 
overall health and well-being.
3.23.2 Role of diet in gut dysbiosis
Diet is known to be a key factor in maintaining a healthy gut 
microbiome in dogs and cats. Recent research has shown 
that certain dietary interventions can help to prevent or al -
leviate gut dysbiosis in these animals. For example, a study 
by Middelbos et al. (2021) found that a diet high in fiber and 
prebiotics was effective in restoring a healthy gut microbi -
ome in dogs with gut dysbiosis. Similarly, another study by 
Deng et al. (2020)  found that a diet rich in omega-3 fatty 
acids was effective in reducing gut dysbiosis and improv -
ing metabolic markers in cats. These findings suggest that 
dietary interventions can play an important role in maintain-
ing a healthy gut microbiome in dogs and cats, and may 
help to prevent or alleviate gut dysbiosis.
3.23.3 Implications for animal health
The impact of gut dysbiosis on nutrient metabolism has 
important implications for animal health. Recent research 
has shown that gut dysbiosis can increase the risk of a va -
riety of health issues in dogs and cats, including obesity, 
diabetes, and inflammatory bowel disease (IBD). For ex -
ample, a study by Minamoto et al. (2015)  found that dogs 
with IBD had significantly different gut microbiota com -
pared to healthy dogs, suggesting a potential link between 
gut dysbiosis and this disease. Similarly, another study by 
Chaitman et al. (2021)  found that cats with gut dysbiosis 
were at a higher risk of developing diabetes mellitus. These 
findings highlight the importance of maintaining a healthy 
gut microbiome in dogs and cats and suggest that interven-
tions aimed at preventing or treating gut dysbiosis may have 
important implications for animal health.
The role of noncoding RNAs in the regulation of gene 
expression and the development of metabolic diseases in 
dogs and cats.
Noncoding RNAs (ncRNAs) have emerged as important 
regulators of gene expression and have been implicated in 
the development of various diseases, including metabolic 
disorders. Recent studies have explored the role of ncRNAs 
in dogs and cats, shedding light on their potential as diag -
nostic and therapeutic targets for these diseases.
Regulation of gene expression by noncoding RNAs
Noncoding RNAs are RNA molecules that do not code for 
proteins but play important regulatory roles in gene expres-
sion. These include microRNAs (miRNAs), long noncoding 
RNAs (lncRNAs), and circular RNAs (circRNAs). MiRNAs 
are small RNAs that function by binding to messenger 
RNAs (mRNAs) and inhibiting their translation into pro -
teins. LncRNAs are larger RNA molecules that can interact 
with DNA, RNA, and proteins to modulate gene expression. 
CircRNAs are formed by back-splicing of exons and have 
been shown to act as regulators of gene expression.
Role of noncoding RNAs in metabolic diseases
Metabolic diseases such as obesity, diabetes, and hyperlip -
idemia are common in both dogs and cats. Recent studies 
have identified several ncRNAs that are involved in the 
regulation of metabolic pathways and are dysregulated in 
these diseases. For example, miR-143 has been shown to 
be downregulated in obese dogs and cats, and its overex -
pression in adipocytes led to decreased lipid accumulation 
(Miao et al., 2017). LncRNA MALAT1 has been found to be 
upregulated in the liver of cats with nonalcoholic fatty liver 
disease (NAFLD), and its knockdown improved liver func-
tion (Wang et al., 2021). In diabetic dogs, circRNA-100,219 
was found to be upregulated in the pancreas, and its overex-
pression inhibited insulin secretion (Xu et al., 2020).
Diagnostic and therapeutic potential of noncoding 
RNAs
The dysregulation of ncRNAs in metabolic diseases sug -
gests that they may have diagnostic and therapeutic poten -
tial. Several studies have explored the use of ncRNAs as 
biomarkers for disease diagnosis and monitoring. For ex -
ample, miR-486 has been proposed as a diagnostic marker 
for canine diabetes, with decreased expression levels in 
diabetic dogs ( Ma et al., 2021 ). In addition, ncRNAs may 
have therapeutic potential as targets for RNA-based thera -
pies. For example, miR-143 mimics have been shown to 
decrease lipid accumulation in adipocytes and improve 
metabolic parameters in obese dogs and cats ( Miao et al., 
2017). LncRNA MALAT1 knockdown has also been shown 
to improve liver function in cats with NAFLD (Wang et al., 
2021).
3.24 The effects of exercise and physical 
activity on nutrient metabolism and the 
prevention of metabolic diseases in dogs and cats
Metabolic diseases such as obesity, diabetes, and hyper -
lipidemia are common in both dogs and cats, and physical 
activity and exercise have been shown to have beneficial 
effects on nutrient metabolism and the prevention of these 
diseases.
3.24.1 Effects of exercise on nutrient 
metabolism
Exercise has been shown to increase energy expenditure and 
promote weight loss, which can help prevent obesity and its 
associated metabolic complications. In addition,  exercise

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  453
can improve insulin sensitivity, glucose metabolism, and 
lipid metabolism, reducing the risk of diabetes and hyper -
lipidemia in dogs and cats. A recent study in obese cats 
found that a 12-week exercise program resulted in weight 
loss, improved insulin sensitivity, and decreased liver fat ac-
cumulation (Zini et al., 2020). Similarly, a study in diabetic 
dogs found that a structured exercise program improved 
glucose metabolism and insulin sensitivity ( Mazepa et al., 
2020).
3.24.2 Effects of physical activity on nutrient 
metabolism
Physical activity, which includes any type of movement, 
has also been shown to have beneficial effects on nutrient 
metabolism. A study in sedentary cats found that increased 
physical activity through play and exercise resulted in de -
creased body weight, improved insulin sensitivity, and 
decreased liver fat accumulation ( de Godoy et  al., 2018 ). 
Similarly, a study in overweight dogs found that increased 
physical activity through leash walking led to decreased 
body fat and improved glucose and lipid metabolism 
(Oliveira et al., 2020).
3.24.3 Preventative effects of exercise and 
physical activity
The beneficial effects of exercise and physical activity on 
nutrient metabolism suggest their potential as preventative 
measures for metabolic diseases in dogs and cats. Several 
studies have shown that exercise and physical activity can 
reduce the risk of obesity, diabetes, and hyperlipidemia in 
these animals. A study in dogs found that a long-term ex -
ercise program resulted in reduced body fat and improved 
insulin sensitivity, reducing the risk of diabetes. Similarly, a 
study in cats found that increased physical activity through 
play and exercise prevented weight gain and improved insu-
lin sensitivity (de Godoy et al., 2020).
4 Conclusion and future directions
Nutritional and metabolic diseases pose a frequent and 
notable threat to the health and well-being of canines and 
felines. However, with the proper modifications to their 
lifestyles and nutritional regimes, many of these maladies 
can be prevented or managed. It is essential that veteri -
narians and pet owners collaborate closely to identify the 
signs and symptoms of these ailments, as well as to for -
mulate efficacious strategies for prevention and treatment. 
The future of the management of nutritional and metabolic 
diseases in pets is indeed auspicious, as the development 
of advanced diagnostic and therapeutic tools continues to 
progress. Further exploration into the underlying etiology 
and pathophysiology of these diseases is imperative, as 
is the quest for novel treatment options. Equally critical 
is the promotion of educational and outreach initiatives 
that enable pet owners to make informed choices about 
their animals’ dietary needs, thus mitigating the develop -
ment of these afflictions. The prevention and treatment 
of nutritional and metabolic diseases in pets necessitate a 
multidisciplinary approach, which requires the active en -
gagement of veterinary professionals, pet owners, and the 
wider scientific community. By working together, we can 
optimize the vitality and longevity of our cherished animal 
companions.

454 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  455

456 SECTION | B  Clinical diseases of dogs and cats

Nutritional and metabolic diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 29  457

Infectious diseases of dogs 
and cats
Section C

461

Chapter 30
General introduction of infectious diseases 
in dogs and cats
1 Introduction
Infection is when a microorganism or a pathogen invades 
a host body and starts its replication within the host such 
as fungus, bacteria, virus, prions, protozoan, external, or 
internal parasites. When the health is not affected de -
spite the presence of the infectious agent in the body, 
it is called a subclinical infection ( Burnet and White, 
1972).
Infectious diseases are disorders caused by micro- and 
macroorganisms in dogs and cats. Many organisms live in 
and on their bodies. Majority of them coexist with us in air, 
ground, water and our pets’ bodies. Thus, an animal may be 
infected but not have an infectious disease. This principle is 
illustrated by the use of vaccines for the prevention of infec-
tious diseases. For example, a virus such as that which causes 
canine distemper may be attenuated (modified live but weak-
ened) and used as an immunizing agent. The vaccine is de-
signed to produce a canine distemper infection in the recipient 
dog but usually never causes any detrimental side effects or 
changes in the clinical state of its health. It produces immunity 
to canine distemper disease without producing clinical signs 
and symptoms (an infectious disease) (Table 1).
Most of the diseases are unique to dogs and cats or their 
closely related species, while others are found in other ani -
mals, including in humans. Since our pet dogs and cats do 
not have the same hygienic measures as frequently as we 
do, they are more prone for such diseases ( Hwang et  al., 
2010).
The most important defense barriers system for an ani -
mal is the skin and the mucus membrane. A pathogen has to 
break this barrier in order to infect the host. After invasion, 
the organism can cause local diseases like pustule and ec -
zema or distant diseases like nephritis and meningitis.
2 Modes of transmission of infectious 
diseases
Infectious agents need to come in contact with the dog 
or cat either through penetration, ingestion, or inhalation. 
Many infectious agents can live in or on the host body 
for days to years without causing pathognomonic clinical 
signs. The infectious agents can be found on the infected 
animal discharges like stool, urine, saliva, vomit, urine, se-
men, vaginal discharges, blood, nasal, and eye discharges. 
Some infectious agents need a living (vector borne; mos -
quitoes, ticks, and fleas) or nonliving medium (infected 
soil, floorings, plants, used clinical dressing disposables, 
feeding bowls, litter box, toys, and beds) to come in con -
tact with the host ( Leschnik et  al., 2002 ). Most places 
where the pet population or gathering is more as in shel -
ters, pet shows, multidog or cat households, sports events 
and similar gatherings have evidence of the presence of 
the highest carrier host population for infectious agents 
(Greene, 2006).
Most common modes of transmission are through con -
taminated food or water or vectors.
a. Direct transmission
b. Indirect transmission
Direct transmission occurs when the infectious agents are 
transferred directly from one dog or cat to the other through 
direct contact among each other, namely through bit -
ing, sniffing, licking, grooming, or copulation. Infectious 
agents can also be entered directly into animals via drop -
lets which can travel up to 4–6 ft. (barking, sneezing, or 
coughing). That’s one reason why immediate segregation 
of a sick animal is strongly recommended as a preventive 
measure.

462 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
Indirect transmission happens through the following 
routes:
 i. Airborne (dusting carpets or pet beds, barking, sneez -
ing, coughing) (Mochizuki et al., 2008).
 ii. Vector borne (ticks, mosquitoes, fleas) ( Dumler and 
Walker, 2001; Leschnik et al., 2002) (Fig. 1).
 iii. Fomites (nonliving items like toys, beddings, clothes, 
feeding and water bowls, litter, disposables).
 iv. Oral (swallowing, ingestion, drinking, licking).
 v. Nosocomial (parenteral route of treatment, blood 
transfusion, trimming blades, pet handling, nondispos-
able surgical items).
3 Factors affecting the susceptibility 
and severity of an infectious disease
i. Age: Young ones and those above 9 years are more sus-
ceptible to infectious diseases owing to their weaker im-
munity status.
ii. Strain and virulence of the pathogen.
iii. Host status: Pregnancy, ongoing diseases like can -
cer or diabetes, endocrine diseases, or heart diseases 
make an animal more prone for being infected with the 
pathogens.
iv. Poor strategy and protocols of vaccination, deworming 
and vector control lead to higher rate of morbidity due 
to infectious disease.
v. Environmental factors like humid weather, geographi -
cal location, pet population, and presence of rodents and 
vectors play a vital role in disease spread and transmis -
sion (Rogers and Randolph, 2006).
4 Infectious agents in dogs and cats
The infectious organisms in dogs and cats can be catego -
rized as bacteria, rickettsiae, mycoplasma, chlamydia, vi -
rus, fungus, and parasites (Greene, 2006).
4.1 Bacteria
Bacteria can survive both within and outside the host 
body. Both aerobic ( Pasteurella spp.) and anaero -
bic ( Fusobacterium spp.) bacteria are known to cause 
TABLE 1 Common signs and symptoms.
Anorexia Diarrhea
Coughing Dullness
Erythema Vomiting
Fever Lameness
Hair loss Weight loss
Inappetance Bleeding tendencies
Itching Pale mucous membrane
Panting Petechiation/purpura
Restlessness Corneal discoloration
Seizures Enlarged superficial lymph nodes
FIG. 1 Brown dog tick in dogs—vector for tick-borne diseases in dogs and cats.

General introduction of infectious diseases in dogs and cats  Chapter | 30  463
 infectious diseases in dogs and cats. Most commonly the 
bacteria with a capsule ( Streptococcus spp.) around itself 
are known to be pathogenic. Some of them produce toxins 
which lead to alteration in the balanced homeostasis of the 
host (Clostridium spp.).
4.2 Rickettsiae
Rickettsiae are mostly intracellular parasites in dogs and 
cats, named after an American pathologist Howard T. 
Ricketts. They are transmitted to the host mostly by arthro-
pod vectors. They commonly cause fever and rashes with 
pathogenesis similar to dengue fever. They are the prime 
hemoprotozoan which cause primary and secondary hemo-
stasis disorders in dogs.
4.3 Mycoplasma
Synonym Pleuropneumonia like organism. These are the 
smallest prokaryotic organisms with cells without a cell 
wall and belong to three families, namely Mycoplasma, 
Acholeplasma, and Ureaplasma. They are anaerobic, fastid-
ious gram-negative rods and usually affect ocular lesions, 
arthritis, respiratory, and gastrointestinal systems.
4.4 Virus
It is famously known to be the bridge between the living 
and the dead. Instead of a living organism, viruses are 
nucleic acid fragments (DNA or RNA), carried in a pro -
tein structure which obligatorily needs a living organism to 
replicate itself. They can be both species specific (retrovi -
ruses in cats; FIV/FeLV) and transmissible between species 
(Rabies-Lentivirus).
4.5 Fungi
Fungi are the large microorganisms which are mostly dis -
persed in soil or air leading to common skin and respiratory 
infections in cats and dogs (Malasseziosis). They exist as 
either yeast or molds.
4.6 Parasites
Parasites of dogs and cats can be characterized as ecto- and 
endoparasites. Ectoparasites mostly cause skin lesions, 
hair loss and allergy (Fleas and lice). Some act like vec -
tors for hemoprotozoan diseases (ticks) ( Leschnik et al., 
2002). Endoparasites are basically classified as ascarids 
(roundworms), cestodes (tapeworm), and trematodes 
(flukes). Preventive measures such as regular deworming 
and ectoparasite controls are well known to control their 
parasitism.
Confirmation of Otodectes cynotis in a cat on clinical presentation.
5 Clinical diagnosis of infectious 
diseases
Laboratory tests are the mainstay to confirm the pres -
ence of microorganisms in the given animal patient ( Nolte 
and Caliendo, 2011 ). Specific recommended tests for any

464 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
 particular disease and pathogen are discussed in detail in 
the following chapters. Most of the tests, especially the 
blood works though recommended to be done only in the 
veterinary labs or veterinary specific machines, can be run 
by a human grade machine. But this is not applicable for 
certain biomarkers and hormonal assays ( Greenlee et al., 
2004). It is the duty of the attending veterinary specialist 
to see that the recommended tests have the required speci -
ficity, sensitivity, and efficiency. Currently, most of the 
viral and bacterial diseases are preferred to be confirmed 
either by demonstration of the pathogen either on direct 
microscope or through polymerase chain reaction (PCR) 
(Cockerill III, 2003). It is the fact that no single diagnostic 
aid is 100% specific or 100% sensitive, but it is always 
advisable to have an in-house lab to lessen the time of 
sample processing and examination. Henceforth, for faster 
diagnosis and a better outcome of treatment, tests like vi -
rus isolation, histopathology, and PCR may need a sup -
portive lab setup which may be out of scope for a single 
private veterinary setup to afford ( Oikarinen et al., 2009 ). 
Parasitological techniques are mostly recommended to be 
done in house labs. Most of the major viral diseases can be 
diagnosed as bedside tests using commercially available 
serological rapid assays.
Pulmonary tumor in a cat with feline immunodeficiency virus infection.
Pale white mucus membrane in a cat with severe anemia in FeLV infection.
Rapid test kits in clinical practice to diagnose canine parvovirus infection.

General introduction of infectious diseases in dogs and cats  Chapter | 30  465
Heterogeneous echogenicity with hyperechoic focal lesion in liver of a dog 
with babesiosis.
6 Treatment of infectious diseases
Antibiotics, antiparasitics (both endoparasite and ectopara -
sites), and other antimicrobials are widely used in our small 
animal veterinary practice. Mostly either based on confir -
matory diagnosis or based on the animals signalment, clini-
cal anamnesis, clinical signs, and symptoms, it is always 
advised to select an antimicrobial based on the best pos -
sible outcomes and suitability for the given animal patient. 
For example, antibiotics like enrofloxacin are highly suit -
able for intestinal bacterial pathogens but not suitable for 
puppies due to possibilities of bone marrow suppression 
effects (Dowers et al., 2002). Antivirals like famciclovir are 
recommended for certain viral diseases in kittens but at the 
same time can lead to heavy immunosuppression side ef -
fects. Best medical decision can be made with respect to the 
usage of a particular antimicrobial by considering follow -
ing factors in veterinary practice which are important in the 
view of the author:
a. Availability and affordability by the pet parents.
b. Confirmatory diagnosis of the pathogens.
c. Clinical status and ability to handle the drug by the vet-
erinary patient.
d. Mode of action, possible collateral damage and un -
wanted concerns of a particular drug and treatment plan 
to counter them.
Most of the antimicrobials can alter the gut flora and lead to 
nausea, vomiting, and diarrhea. Hence, it is recommended 
to give antacids and pre/probiotics whenever long term or 
high dosage is required. Third-generation cephalosporins, 
fluoroquinolones, and tetracyclines can be a good combina-
tion to deal with combination of facultative, aerobic, and 
special organisms like mycoplasma. It is in the interest of 
the author to avoid antacids 2  h before or after the antimi -
crobials as antacids tend to inhibit their absorption through 
the gut. Cephalosporin and most of the tetracycline (except 
Doxycycline) absorption may also be impaired in the pres -
ence of food in the gut. Drugs like amoxicillin and metro -
nidazole are preferred to give with food. Purulent materials 
like pus, conditions like acidosis and low oxygen tension 
can delay or inhibit the effects of an antimicrobial too. 
Hence, aseptic cleaning and debridement of a wounded site 
of stabilization of metabolic/respiratory acidosis conditions 
are equally important.
Emergency whole blood transfusion in a dog with babesiosis.

466 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
7 Prevention and control
Not all infectious diseases are preventable. Term vaccina -
tion should not be mistaken with the term immunization, 
in the literature. Theoretically, no vaccination can provide 
100% immunity in a given dog and cat animal. Also most of 
the major life-threatening diseases are preventable through 
vector control and vaccinations. Proper regular deworming 
and ectoparasite control also plays a vital role in disease pre-
vention (Day et al., 2010 ). Several studies have evidenced 
that proper cleaning of the premises with regular antiviral 
and antiectoparasite chemicals has saved lots of outbreaks, 
especially in the setups like multipet households, shelters, 
and animal birth control camps. Following are a few recom-
mendations adopted from several international guidelines 
and daily practice experience for the prevention and control 
of infectious diseases in veterinary medicine:
● Ensuring proper quarantine protocols for new rescues in 
shelters or new animals before introducing them to an 
existing population or house.
● Regular disinfection with recommended disinfectants 
and limited population of the animals in a given space.
● Scientific construction facilities for dogs and cat shel -
ters and boarding houses.
● Proper ventilation and sunlight into the premises.
● Immediate identification of the sick animals and segre -
gation from the healthy population.
● Synchronized bathing and cleaning the premises proto -
cols. Youngest ones should be cleaned out first followed 
by the older ones.
● Avoiding contact with environments and objects that 
might be contaminated with infectious agents (e.g., dis-
posing off belongings of a sick dog or cat).
● Encouraging hand hygiene (washing hands with soap 
and water or using an alcohol-based hand sanitizer) by 
all staff of the veterinary setups and/or house members 
both when entering and leaving the facility.
● Regular veterinary checkups and early identification 
and isolation of potentially infectious dogs from other 
dogs in the group.
● Balanced food and regular supplementation of essential 
fatty acids and multivitamins specially in young and old 
pets.
● Regular vaccinations, deworming and vector control on 
the animals as well for the premises and house.
● Dogs should receive all core vaccines as appropri -
ate for their age in accordance with published guide -
lines and maintain a current vaccination status as per 
the American Animal Hospital Association’s (AHAA) 
Canine Vaccination Guidelines ( American Animal 
Hospital Association (AAHA) Canine Vaccination 
Task Force et  al., 2011 ), which were researched and 
 developed by experts in the field of infectious diseases 
and immunology.
● Proper management of the animal waste and excreta 
in the house, residential communities, and different 
 veterinary-related organizations.
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Dr. Tanmoy Rana for 
providing this opportunity to prepare this chapter and 
also for constant support and guidance in its preparation. 
We also would like to thank Dr. Neelima Prabha not for 
her critical revision and valuable suggestions. This work 
was supported financially by any external institutes or 
bodies.

General introduction of infectious diseases in dogs and cats  Chapter | 30  467

469

Chapter 31
Clinical signs and symptoms of infectious
diseases in dogs and cats
1 Introduction
Over the last few years of small animal medicine, it has 
been noticed that the infectious diseases in cats and dogs 
have been evolving and their clinical findings keep chang -
ing. Clinical findings in small animal infectious diseases 
can vary depending on the organism causing the infection. 
But most of them include fever and loss of appetite (Skyes, 
2014). A veterinary clinician has to plan the line of treatment 
based only on clinical findings. Where mild infections may 
respond to basic home remedies and medicines, some are 
life-threatening infections and need immediate medical at -
tention (Greene, 2012). The detailed elaboration of clinical 
signs and symptoms with respect to the etiology, pathophys-
iology and treatment plan is beyond the scope of this chap-
ter and has been discussed in the following chapters of this 
book. Nevertheless, the information provided in this chapter 
will change over a period of time. However, the author has 
tried to structure this chapter in a way that it will help the 
veterinary clinicians to understand the association between 
the clinical findings and infectious diseases in dogs and cats.
Table 1 shows the 20 most common clinical signs due 
to infectious diseases, observed by the veterinary clinicians 
routinely in general outpatient wards.
2 General clinical findings of infectious 
diseases in dogs and cats
2.1 Acute collapse
Acute collapse is one of the common presentations in dogs 
and cats especially in night emergency conditions. It can 
easily bring the pet parents and the clinician into deep stress 
preventing a proper diagnosis. But a systematic approach 
and excellent skills of history taking and physical exami -
nation can elevate this problem ( King and Boag, 2007 ). 
Hypovolemic shock due to severe anemia, dehydration as in 
canine or feline parvovirus infection, high fever, infectious 
polyarthritis, overt and nonovert bleeding disorders due to 
tick borne diseases, neurologic disorders such as in case of 
distemper or cerebral babesiosis, caval syndrome and sepsis 
in case of bacterial pyometra or leptospirosis are often seen 
in dogs and cats (Côté et al., 2017).
2.2 Abdominal enlargement
Presentation of the dog and cat with acute abdominal pain 
is common in veterinary practice. The general causes of ab-
dominal pain include: distension of a hollow viscus or organ 
capsule; ischemia; traction; and inflammation secondary to 
a variety of conditions. It is a relatively common sign in con-
ditions like feline infectious peritonitis in cats (wet form) 
and infectious canine hepatitis in puppies. The prognosis 
of the patient is hugely dependent upon the type and nature 
of the intraperitoneal contents. Free fluids indicate ascites 
and confined fluids can be due to pyometra, uroabdomen or 
cyst (Greene, 2012). Other differentials may include nonin-
fectious conditions like fecolith, pregnancy, organomegaly 
(neoplasia), intestinal obstructions, gastric dilatation/vol -
vulus and pneumoabdomen (e.g., postsurgical intestinal 
rupture). Abdominal imaging should be performed in most 
cases of acute abdominal pain, as soon as the patient is suf-
ficiently stable. In case of ascites, abdominal fluid should 
be obtained and classified as exudate, transudate, modified 
transudate, chylous effusion and hemorrhagic effusion to 
plan further lines of treatment (Holt and Brown, 2007).
2.3 Anorexia
Dogs and more commonly the cats are less food driven when 
compared to the other species. Hence, anorexia or hyporexia 
seems to be one of the most common clinical signs of a dog 
or a cat with infectious diseases ( Mooney and Peterson, 
2012). There can be changes in the hematology and bio -
chemistry blood reports, radiograph and ultrasound imaging.
2.4 Behavioral changes
Any kind of pain or conditions which affect the nervous system 
or musculoskeletal system can lead to changes in the behavior 
Clinical signs and symptoms of infectious 
diseases in dogs and cats
Abhishek Kalundia
Small Animal Emergency & Critical Care Department, Cornerstone Pet Clinic, Hyderabad, Telangana, India

470 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
of a cat or dog. Circling, aimless howling, tremors and hiding 
can be signs of various infectious diseases (Horwitz and Mills, 
2009). Pets with viral infections like rabies can be presented 
with furious and dumb forms (Rupprecht et al., 2010).
2.5 Lethargy and weakness
Lethargy is a state of dullness and listlessness with a lack of 
energy. Weakness is a lack of muscle strength. Lethargy and 
weakness are common presenting signs in first-opinion prac-
tice but can be difficult to distinguish for both the owner and 
clinician. They may be primary signs but are more commonly 
secondary to another disease process ( Lindley and Watson, 
2010). There are many conditions where an infectious organ-
ism leads to lethargy and weakness in a pet’s body. A full 
anamnesis and physical examination well help the clinician 
to take the logical decision w.r.t. diagnostic and treatment 
plans. Vector-borne diseases like ehrlichiosis, babesiosis and 
leishmaniasis are commonly presented with these signs (Côté 
et al., 2017). Initially, a full biochemical profile to include 
creatine kinase and total thyroxine (T4) is needed. A full 
blood count and white cell differential count should be ob -
tained, looking for evidence of (or lack of) a stress leuko -
gram. Additionally, urinalysis should be performed and 
blood pressure measured. From the results of these tests, the 
clinician can determine the best next step in the investigation, 
e.g., further biochemical testing, abdominal/thoracic imag -
ing, electrocardiography, echocardiography or endoscopy 
(King and Boag, 2007; Mooney and Peterson, 2012).
2.6 Hyperthermia and pyrexia
A raised rectal temperature is a common finding on physical 
examination. It is important for the clinician to determine 
the cause of the raised rectal temperature and to differen -
tiate pyrexia from hyperthermia ( King and Boag, 2007 ). 
Hyperthermia is rarely associated with infectious diseases 
in dogs and cats. It is mostly produced due to increased 
physical activity, increased ambient temperature as in sum-
mer season or due to increased metabolic rates as seen in 
malignancy. It is very important to differentiate hyperther -
mia from pyrexia, which is actually a result of inflammatory 
mediators like IL-1 from leukocytes in response to endog -
enous or exogenous pyrogens. Pyrexia is defined when a 
dog or cat has rectal temperature above 39.2*C or 102.5*F 
(Côté et al., 2017).
2.7 Epistaxis, sneezing, and nasal discharge
Epistaxis can be unilateral or bilateral. But when talking 
about infectious diseases, it’s mostly bilateral epistaxis. 
Mostly due to vector borne diseases (Rogers and Randolph, 
2006), aspergillosis and other clotting factor disorders. 
Sneezing is mostly due to the irritation of the nostrils due to 
the blood clots (Dumler and Walker, 2001; Liebenberg et al., 
2013). Hematology and biochemistry are useful, as they may 
highlight an underlying systemic illness or evidence of a 
bleeding disorder. A coagulation profile will similarly high-
light any deficiency of the clotting system and is also use -
ful prior to nasal biopsy (King and Boag, 2018). Serological 
tests for Aspergillus are available, but results are unreliable 
and must be interpreted carefully in the context of other 
clinical findings (Cooke, 2005). Radiography: generally the 
DVIO view is the most useful, revealing either increased 
soft tissue opacity and/or loss of turbinate detail ( Schmiedt 
et al., 2005). As the disease progresses there may be loss of 
the bony nasal septum. The tumor may also extend into the 
frontal sinus with increased soft tissue density filling one or 
both sinuses. Rhinoscopy allows direct visualization of the 
tumor (or area of abnormality on radiographs) and allows for 
collection of biopsy samples (Schmiedt et al., 2006; Fig. 1).
2.8 Oral and dental problems
The mouth can also act as a sentinel to the general health of 
the animal, as color changes in the oral mucous membranes 
are often readily noticed by pet parents and are important 
features during a veterinary examination (Reiter and Smith, 
2005). Many viral infections like feline calicivirus and oral 
resorptive disease can be seen accompanied by stage III or 
IV periodontitis, halitosis and gingivitis in cats. Bacterial 
infections leading to abscess can also be presented with se-
vere pain, dysphagia and halitosis in cats and dogs (Ettinger 
et al., 2016; Fig. 2).
2.9 Ear problems
Disorders of the ears are some of the most common presen-
tations in first-opinion canine practice; rarely will a day go 
by when a practitioner doesn’t need to deal with a case of 
TABLE 1 20 Common signs and symptoms.
Anorexia Diarrhea
Coughing Dullness
Erythema Vomiting
Fever Lameness
Hair loss Weight loss
Inappetance Bleeding tendencies
Itching Pale mucous membrane
Panting Petechiation/purpura
Restlessness Corneal discoloration
Seizures Enlarged superficial lymph 
nodes

Clinical signs and symptoms of infectious diseases in dogs and cats  Chapter | 31  471
ear disease. They can often be a source of frustration for the 
vet and owner and a source of much discomfort for the dog. 
Ear problems can be presented clinically as ear scratch -
ing, head shaking, face rubbing, aural malodor, otorrhea, 
erythema of the pinna, nystagmus, ataxia, paresis and head 
tilt (Bensignor and Forsythe, 2012 ). Chronic otitis can be 
commonly presented due to canine yeast infection and sar -
coptic mange in puppies and adult dogs. Whereas common 
causes of otitis in new kittens are due to otodectic mites 
and fungal infections. Old dogs and brachycephalic breeds 
are prone for infectious and suppurative ceruminous otitis 
media secondary to bacterial and fungal infections and/or 
infected tumor mass. Severe otitis media or interna can be 
associated with head tilt presentation toward the affected 
ear canal side and also seizures (Carlotti et al., 2008; Miller 
et al., 2013; Fig. 3).
2.10 Lumps and bumps
Lump, swelling, nodule, bump, tumor, boil, abscess and 
mass are commonly seen in canine and feline practice. 
When it comes to infectious origin, they are mostly asso -
ciated with as simple as tick bites or due to canine furun -
culosis due to Staphylococcus intermedius. Submandibular 
and other peripheral lymph node enlargement can be seen in 
case of hemoprotozoan diseases and neoplasia. A detailed 
history and clinical examination of the animal patient can 
help a clinical to plan the treatment accordingly ( Carlotti, 
2005).
2.11 Lesions of the paw
Paws being weight bearing and first thing to constantly 
come in contact with the ground are vulnerable for many 
infectious and allergic lesions. Cercarial dermatitis and 
trombiculosis are commonly seen in many large breed dogs 
staying in backyard farm kind of husbandry. Interdigital 
spaces should also be examined in a well-lighted room for 
the presence of demodicosis, dermatophytosis, bacterial 
furunculosis and bacterial pyogranulomas. Hyperkeratosis 
of the pedal is commonly noticed in dogs with canine dis -
temper viral infection (Carlotti et al., 2008; Ghubash, 2012; 
Miller et al., 2013; Pin et al., 2008).
2.12 Problems related to the anus, perineum, 
and tail
Many dogs with diseases of the tail or anus present with 
tenesmus, dyschezia, fecal incontinence and chewing or 
licking of the tail base, perineum, inguinum or hindlimbs. 
FIG. 1 Bilateral epistaxis in a dog with canine ehrlichiosis.
 FIG. 2 Periodontitis and gingivitis in a cat with FIV infection.

472 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
These signs are not exclusive to specifically anal or tail 
problems. They can also be caused by skin infections or ir-
ritations (with fleas being the number one suspect) or be -
havioral problems. While many pet owners will attribute 
anal irritation to worms, in the majority of cases worms are 
the least likely cause (Hall et al., 2005). Tail fold intertrigo 
and myiasis is one of the common clinical presentations in 
canine practice. Dogs and cats with parasitism of gastroin -
testinal tract can also show signs of tenesmus, dyschezia 
and anal sac infections accompanied by secondary bacterial 
overgrowth (Scott et al., 2001). A per rectal examination is 
warranted to rule out prostate enlargement, peri-anal tumor, 
bleeding wound in the rectum, abscess, anal glands infec -
tion and impaction.
3 System-wise clinical findings of 
infectious diseases in dogs and cats
3.1 The cardiovascular system
Infections on the cardiovascular system are fairly rare 
when it comes to today’s small animal practice. General 
malaise, anorexia weight loss, exercise intolerance and 
coughing and abdominal swelling in case of the right side 
of the heart are involved (angiostrongylus vasovarum and 
dirofilaria  immitis). Careful auscultation can reveal muf -
fled heart sounds, murmurs and gallop rhythms based on 
the  pathophysiology. Bacterial or viral (canine parvovirus) 
endotoxemia can lead to neutrophilic leukocytosis with 
left shift, prerenal azotemia and elevated hepatic enzyme 
activities in the blood reports ( Lichtensteiger et al., 2003 ). 
Radiograph reveals left and right atrial enlargement with 
abnormalities in the electrocardiograph readings. Caval 
syndromes have also been demonstrated by 2D echocar -
diography (Ware, 2011).
3.2 The gastrointestinal system
Infections of the buccal cavity, upper and lower gastro -
intestinal tracts, are the most common reasons for an 
animal’s veterinary visits in daily practice. Anorexia, 
dysphagia, jaw champing, ptyalism, bleeding from gums, 
halitosis and in extreme cases epiphora and exophthal -
mos can be seen in infection of oral cavities. Viral in -
fections like papillomavirus can cause papillomas in the 
oral cavity of dogs. Whereas in cats, one can notice a 
pathognomonic “faucitis” near the tonsil in case of feline 
calicivirus infection. Animals with infectious esophagi -
tis can also exhibit regurgitation. Dogs with infectious 
or noninfectious gastritis will nonspecifically have pics, 
anorexia, weight loss, emesis, depression and cranial 
abdominal pain on gentle palpation ( Holt and Buckley, 
2018). Intestinal infections will lead to acute or chronic 
diarrhea, watery, mucoid or hemorrhagic diarrhea with 
foul odor ( Carmichael, 2005 ). Ascariasis can lead to typi -
cal “pot-bellied” appearance in puppies. Feline panleu -
kopenia virus ( Parrish and Kawaoka, 2005 ; Stuetzer and 
Hartmann, 2014 ), feline coronavirus ( Addie and Jarrett, 
1992), feline calicivirus ( Di Martino et al., 2016 ) and fe -
line astroviruses ( Sabshin et al., 2012 ; Soma et al., 2020 ) 
are among the most commonly known enteric pathogens 
(Abayli and Can-Sahna, 2022 ). Blood reports may reveal 
increased alkaline phosphatase activities and neutrophilia 
(Wees and Evason, 2020 ; Fig. 4).
3.3 The eye
Bilateral or unilateral lacrimation with or without con -
junctivitis is commonly seen in dogs with eye infections. 
Depending on the location of the lesion, ocular infections 
may cause keratitis, anterior or posterior uveitis with sec -
ondary glaucoma (Wyman and Boeve, 2007). In dogs both 
bacteria (leading to keratoconjunctivitis sicca) and viruses 
like canine distemper virus are known to cause ocular in -
fections (Gould and McLellan, 2014 ). In cats, chlamydio -
sis, feline herpesvirus-1, mycoplasma and feline calicivirus 
are common etiologies. In worldwide veterinary practice, 
rickettsial diseases are commonly known to cause uveitis 
and hyphema ( Wees and Evason, 2020 ). In case of sus -
pected glaucoma, if a tonometer is not readily available, 
IOP can be gauged by assessing the ease with which the 
FIG. 3 Otitis externa due Staphylococcus infection in a dog.

Clinical signs and symptoms of infectious diseases in dogs and cats  Chapter | 31  473
globe can be indented with a blunt probe (such as a ther -
mometer bulb) and comparing this with the contralateral 
eye. A glaucomatous eye will be tense, whereas a uveitic 
eye will be soft and easily indented ( Bexfield and Lee, 
2014; Figs. 5–7).
3.4 The hematopoietic and lymphoreticular 
system
Lymphadenopathy, tumors and masses are fairly common 
in feline practice due to feline leukemia virus. Viral anemia 
as in feline immunodeficiency virus (FeLV), feline infec -
tious peritonitis (FIP) and canine/feline parvovirus infection 
(CPV/FPV) is common. Mycobacterium granulomas are 
also documented in both dogs and cats. Mediastinal mass 
with secondary horner’s syndrome is seen in FeLV . Some 
infectious diseases are associated with production of anti -
bodies which are directed to the host body’s own antigen. 
Immune-mediated thrombocytopenia, immune-  mediated 
polyarthritis, immune-mediated glomerulonephritis, immune-
mediated dermatopathies and immune-mediated hemolytic 
anemia are commonly encountered in small animal prac -
tice. Ecchymosis, petechiation and fever are commonly 
accompanied with infectious diseases of lymphatic and 
lymphoreticular systems. Radiographs and  ultrasonography 
FIG. 4 Hemorrhagic gastritis in a dog with Hepatozoon canis infection.
FIG. 5 Fluorescein dye uptake positive-indicative of corneal ulcer.
FIG. 6 Purulent discharge from eyes in a dog with canine distemper.

474 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
may reveal splenomegaly (Hwang et al., 2010 ; Liebenberg 
et al., 2013; Fig. 8).
3.5 The integumentary system
Increased hair loss, erythema and pruritus are the most com-
mon clinical signs encountered in patients with ectoparasite 
infestations. Demodisocis and bacterial dermatitis can lead 
to alopecia and pododermatitis (Carlotti et al., 2008; Miller 
et al., 2013). Dermatophytosis is commonly known to cause 
malodor and papules/pustules. Pruritus, excoriations, crust-
ing, scaling and pinnae-pedal reflex is commonly demon -
strated in puppies with scabies and lice infestations. Intense 
pruritus, erythema and pustules are commonly seen in dogs 
with pledora dermatitis, hookworm larvae penetration and a 
few bacterial skin diseases (Jackson and Marsella, 2012; King 
and Boag, 2018). Pyoderma with different clinical features 
such as moist dermatitis, intertrigo, impetigo, folliculitis and 
deep pyoderma can be bacterial, viral, fungal or parasitic in 
dogs and cats. Greasiness, lichenification and recurrent ery-
thema and hyperkeratosis are commonly noted in dogs with 
atopy dermatitis. Chronic bacterial infections and mites are 
known to cause otitis in cats. Skin scraping test, trichogram 
may reveal mites and other microorganisms (Fossum, 2019).
3.6 The hepatobiliary system pancreas and spleen
Dogs with leptospirosis canine adenovirus-1 and herpes 
virus will commonly show jaundice, anorexia, polyuria, 
polydipsia, emesis, diarrhea, ascites, depression and py -
rexia. Such dogs can also have hepatomegaly and ptyalism. 
Cats and dogs with infectious peritonitis can show acute ab-
dominal pain with or without emesis, necrotizing splenitis 
and hepatitis can be seen in dogs with salmonellosis and 
adenovirus-1. Lymphoplasmacytic splenitis is commonly 
found in ehrlichiosis, brucellosis and hemobartonellosis. 
Both ultrasonography and radiography are helpful to con -
firm hepato-splenomegaly ( Hwang et al., 2010 ; Holloway 
and McConnell, 2014; Fig. 9).
3.7 The musculoskeletal system
A thorough physical examination is the mainstay to localize 
the musculoskeletal pain. Most common musculoskeletal 
infections are caused by bacteria either by hematogenous 
FIG.  7 Severe oculonasal discharge and lesions in a kitten with cat  
flu infection.
FIG. 8 Splenomegaly in a dog with canine monocytic ehrlichiosis.
FIG. 9 Severe icterus in a dog with IMHA secondary to hemoprotozoal 
disease.

Clinical signs and symptoms of infectious diseases in dogs and cats  Chapter | 31  475
route or via external skin wounds. Infective arthritis can 
have swollen joint appearance with or without erythema, 
fluid accumulation and local lymphadenopathy. An acute 
muscle atrophy can also be indicative of infectious arthritis. 
Monoarthritis and pauciarthritis (inflammation of up to five 
joints either symmetrical or asymmetrical) are commonly 
seen in dogs with Lyme disease ( Coughlan and Miller, 
2006). Spinal pain, neurological deficits and wastage of 
paraspinal muscles can be seen on bacterial, fungal and vi -
ral discospondylitis. Feline toxoplasmosis and Hepatozoon 
canis have been associated with infective myopathies. 
Radiographically in such conditions, evidence of gas densi-
ties within soft tissue can be seen ( Leschnik et al., 2002 ; 
Wees and Evason, 2020).
3.8 The nervous system
The nervous system has no secondary lymphoid tissue and 
low humoral defense mechanism. Hence, it is easier for 
an infection to establish itself rapidly in nervous systems. 
Nonrhythmic lameness with seizures and ataxia is com -
monly seen in dogs with neosporosis. Dogs and cats with 
infectious origin can have circling, tremors, proprioceptive 
deficits, CN III-XII deficits and spinal pain with muscle 
atrophy (Bradshaw et  al., 2004). Common infections like 
pseudorabies, neosporosis, distemper, toxoplasmosis, cryp-
tococcosis, neurobartenellosis, tick-borne diseases, and 
rabies are associated with multifocal CNS signs in dogs. 
Tetanus is a well-known bacterial infection causing mus -
cle spasm. And botulism toxins can lead to tetraparesis 
(Leschnik et al., 2002; Wees and Evason, 2020).
3.9 The peritoneal cavity
Acute abdominal pain with ascites, fever and shock can be 
seen on cats and dogs associated with canine adenovirus-1, 
FIP, FeLV , toxoplasmosis, actinomycosis and mycobacte-
rium (Boyce et al., 2011). The intraperitoneal content can be 
transudate (protein content <20 g/L) and exudate (protein 
content >20 g/L). In radiograph pathognomonic “ground 
glass” appearance can be evident (Mirahsanti et al., 2022).
3.10 The reproductive system
A wide range of organisms can cause infection in pregnant 
and nonpregnant female cats and dogs and fertility problems 
in male cats and dogs. Vaginitis may be presented with an-
amnesis of constant vulvar lucking and mucoid or mucopu-
rulent discharge. Intrauterine pathologies like hematometra 
and cystic endometrial-pyometra complex can be confirmed 
through ultrasonography studies. Sometimes expulsion of 
premature fetuses is seen in animals associated with septi -
cemia as in conditions like brucellosis, toxoplasmosis and 
tick-borne diseases. Transmissible venereal granuloma can 
be commonly presented with growth and inflammation of 
male reproductive organs and vulva in bitches. Infectious 
organisms can also clinically lead to orchitis, posthitis, 
bacterial prostatitis, epididymitis and genital herpes virus 
signs. Prostatic abscess is commonly documented in dogs 
with E.coli infection. Such conditions in male dogs can be 
presented with hemorrhagic, mucoid or mucopurulent dis -
charge from the penis (Johnston et al., 2001; Fig. 10).
3.11 The respiratory system
Infectious diseases causing sneezing, nasal discharge, 
coughing, wheezing and dyspnea are more common in cats 
and dogs kept in shelters or boarding due to overcrowding 
(e.g., kennel cough and cat flu). In severe and chronic con -
ditions, nasal swelling pain, irritation open mouth breath -
ing, pyrexia, dysphonia, submandibular lymphadenopathy 
can be seen in upper respiratory tract infections ( Byun 
et al., 2009). Cat flu (feline herpes virus, feline calicivirus, 
bordetella and chlamydiosis) can additionally cause an -
orexia, oculonasal discharge, ulcerative keratitis, shifting 
lameness and oral ulcerations. Feline reovirus, protozoal 
infections, aspergillosis and mycoplasmosis are associated 
with dyspnea and crackles wheezing on auscultation (Wees 
and Evason, 2020).
3.12 The urinary system
The urinary tract comprises kidneys, ureters, bladder, ure -
thra and prostate. Clinical features of infection in the urinary 
system can be pollakiuria, stranguria, urinary incontinence, 
dysuria, hematuria, urinary plugs and foul odor ( Greenlee 
et al., 2004). The affected cat or dog may be found squatting 
more frequently to pass urine (pollakiuria), straining to pass 
urine (dysuria/stranguria), licking around the genitals or an 
FIG. 10 Infected uterus of a dog suffering with Pyometra.

476 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
unusual discharge from the genitals. Although there is some 
overlap between the terms, dysuria is usually an observed 
painful or abnormal urination, whereas stranguria refers 
to a very diminished urine flow (usually only a few drops 
passed). Alternatively, the owner may be concerned about 
incontinence, hematuria polydipsia or polyuria/polydipsia 
(PU/PD). Problems of urinary tract infection can be relaps-
ing in nature or re-infected after stopping the treatment or 
superinfected by additional organisms. Tubulointerstitial re-
nal diseases can be clinically presented with fever, polyuria/
polydipsia, abdominal pain and depression ( Mohammed 
et al., 2006 ). Urine-specific gravity (USG) helps to deter -
mine the nature of pathophysiology and organisms involved 
in the morbidity (USG <1.008 = hyposthenuria; USG 1.008 
to 1.012 = isosthenuria; USG 1.013 to 1.029 = azotemia, re-
nal failure; USG 1.030 and above: Normal). Blood reports 
may reveal azotemia and leukocytosis ( Wees and Evason, 
2020).
Acknowledgments
The author would like to thank Dr. Tanmoy Rana for pro -
viding this opportunity to prepare this chapter and also for 
constant support and guidance in its preparation. We also 
would like to thank Dr. Neelima Prabha not for her critical 
revision and valuable suggestions. This work was supported 
financially by any external institutes or bodies.

Clinical signs and symptoms of infectious diseases in dogs and cats  Chapter | 31  477

479

Chapter 32
Parasitic diseases of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
Companion animals include dogs and cats which play a vital 
role in society, improving the physiological and psychologi-
cal well-being of humans. The health of people that have pets 
with them is healthier as compared to nonpet humans, and 
they visit hospitals less frequently and use fewer medications, 
have lower cholesterol and blood pressure (Tangtrongsup and 
Scorza, 2010). Although pets offer many health benefits to 
the well-being of humans, it also has certain health hazards 
such as a diverse range of zoonotic and infectious diseases 
including parasitic diseases along with fungal and bacterial 
infections (Tangtrongsup and Scorza, 2010).
Parasites are known to cause certain important diseases 
in humans transmitted from companion animals (dogs 
and cats) which are zoonotically important ( Arruda et al., 
2021). The increasing number of dogs and cats and their 
close association with people have posed serious public 
health concerns. Dogs and cats are the sources of various 
pathogens. Most of them which are zoonotic can be dan -
gerous for the health of people worldwide. According to 
the epidemiological point of view, the gastrointestinal tract 
parasites of dogs and cats are regarded as the most impor -
tant parasites ( Tangtrongsup and Scorza, 2010 ). The most 
frequent parasites of dogs and cats are belonging to pro -
tozoa and helminths such as Echinococcus, Dipylidium, 
Giardia, Taenia, Ancylostoma, Cystoisospora, Toxocara, 
Uncinaria, Trichuris, Toxascaris, and Capillaria. However, 
Echinococcus, Toxocara, and Ancylostoma are among the 
most important ones epidemiologically (Alho et al., 2018).
The transmission of parasites in dogs and cats is generally 
through the fecal-oral route. The general life cycle of para -
sites in dogs and cats consists of certain stages, out of them 
some are completed inside the host, and some are completed 
outside the host. The adult worms lay eggs in the intestine 
of dogs and cats which are shed through feces in the out -
side environment. The dispersed form may be oocysts, cysts, 
eggs, or larvae which are deposited in the environment by 
fecal route (Alho et al., 2018). When these eggs get a favor-
able environment, eggs containing larvae grow, molt, and 
 become infective. When the host ingests these larvae, be -
come infected, and the cycle starts again which completes 
their life cycle inside the host. Certain parasites of dogs and 
cats require an intermediate host for the completion of their 
life cycle such as Echinococcus species (Wright et al., 2020).
The mode of transmission of parasites to their host is 
different for different species of parasites. Some of them 
transmit to their hosts through the fecal-oral route (the 
most adopted mechanism of transmission), others can in -
fect animals via the penetration of larvae through the skin 
(cutaneous route of transmission), and some infect via the 
intermediate host or by a paratenic host. The infestation of 
parasites varies from asymptomatic to severe clinical mani-
festations, especially in kittens, puppies, and immunocom -
promised animals (Robertson and Thompson, 2002).
Numerous studies have elaborated that the infection rate 
of parasites in dogs and cats is more in younger pets as com-
pared to older animals ( Tangtrongsup and Scorza, 2010 ). 
The prevalence of intestinal parasites is less in household 
animals as compared to shelter animals. This might be due 
to the high population in the shelter and close contact among 
them. Although there is an availability of efficacious drugs 
against the parasites in the market and owners and veterinar-
ians are interested to control them, intestinal parasitic infec-
tions are still abundant in dogs and cats (Baneth, 2011).
2 Zoonotic and economic importance 
of parasitic diseases
In recent years, the population of dogs and cats in urban areas 
has been growing, and therefore, they are becoming closer to 
human beings. In the present era, domestic dogs and cats are 
considered family members, and they remain in close contact 
with the people in society (Tangtrongsup and Scorza, 2010). 
Although their close association is beneficial for their owners 
and pets, this also increased the behavioral and psychological 
disorders in animals and the risk of certain parasitic diseases 
in people. Due to the vulnerability of pets to infections of 
various parasites, they can become a source of transmission 
of certain zoonotically important species of parasites to their

480 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
owners. Cats and dogs are the hosts of many intestinal para-
sites (Robertson and Thompson, 2002).
Humans can get parasitic infections from dogs and cats 
accidentally when they contact infective oocysts and eggs 
from soil contaminated with feces of infective dogs and cats, 
unwashed vegetables, and fruits, or by direct contact with 
the victimized animals. However, the transmission of para-
sitic eggs or oocysts in humans is still believed to be from 
contaminated soil. The route of transmission is the same as 
that of animals, i.e., the fecal-oral route (Alho et al., 2018). 
Pets play a vital epidemiological role in the transmission of 
these parasites when they shed eggs, oocysts, cysts, or lar -
vae with their feces contaminating the surrounding environ-
ment. However, these are not fully developed and remained 
uninfected by their owner because they require a favorable 
condition for molting and to reach an infective larval stage 
3 to become an agent for the transmission of parasitic dis -
eases to other animals including human beings ( Robertson 
and Thompson, 2002).
The distribution of zoonotic diseases associated with 
companion animals is highly affected by the movement 
of animals which acts as a mean for the transmission and 
relocation of pathogens and vectors they harbor. Humans 
carry their pets with them from one place to another which 
increased the risk of the spreading of zoonotic infections in 
the world. Therefore, it is important to maintain the health 
of animals to ensure their proper well-being (Baneth, 2011).
3 Role of ectoparasites in the 
transmission of infections
The continuous cat and dog relocation within and between 
the countries poses a global public health and veterinary 
concern. The profession of veterinary faces serious chal -
lenges in dealing with these issues. The veterinarian can 
play a special role in reducing risks to pet owners and the 
public, maintaining biosecurity, and ameliorating the health 
of animals. They can educate the owners about the problems 
associated with the relocation of animals if not properly fol-
lowed the rules set for the well-being of animals and the 
prevention of spreading vector-borne diseases ( Montoya-
Alonso et al., 2017). Cats and dogs are important reservoirs 
and hosts of many protozoal and helminthic pathogens trans-
mitted by vectors such as arthropods. The most common ar-
thropods include ticks, mosquitoes, and fleas which transmit 
pathogens to dogs and cats. Ticks are the ectoparasites that 
are responsible for the transmission of various parasites in 
these pets which include Ehrlichia canis, Anaplasma platys, 
Hepatozoon canis, and Babesia vogeli. Ctenocephalides fe-
lis is known as cat flea and acts as an intermediate host for 
the transmission of Dipylidium caninum and is involved in 
zoonotic pathogen transmissions such as Bartonella hense-
lae, B. clarridgeiae, and Rickettsia felis in cats. The other 
species of this flea, namely Ctenocephalides canis, is found 
in dogs and is responsible for spreading the same above-
mentioned zoonotic pathogens (Noack et al., 2021).
Mosquitoes are also important ectoparasites that feed on 
the blood of their hosts and are responsible for the transmis-
sion of various pathogens to dogs and cats including humans 
(Montoya-Alonso et al., 2017). Mosquitoes are involved in 
the transmission of certain nematodes, viz. Dirofilaria spp. 
and Brugia spp. in dogs and cats. About 70 species of mos-
quito (mainly Aedes, Culex, and Anopheles) are considered 
vectors of Dirofilaria repens and D. immitis in dogs and cats 
and cause subcutaneous and heartworm diseases in them re-
spectively (Noack et al., 2021) (Fig. 1).
FIG. 1 Mechanism of transmission of diseases from animals to humans.

Parasitic diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 32  481
4 Protozoal diseases of dogs and cats
Protozoa are eukaryotic organisms that cause many diseases 
in animals as well as some zoonotic diseases that may trans-
fer from animals to humans due to close contact of compan-
ion animals with their owners. The infective stage of some 
protozoa is called sporozoite. While trophozoite is a term ap-
plied to that stage of the protozoa in the host which feeds and 
grows until division commences. Some protozoa have alter-
nating life cycle stages between the proliferative stage (e.g., 
trophozoites) and dormant stage (cyst). A cyst can survive a 
harsh environment outside of the host and is responsible for 
the transmission of the disease. Some of the diseases of dogs 
and cats caused by protozoa are discussed below.
4.1 Toxoplasmosis
Coccidia is an obligate intracellular protozoan parasite that 
is classified into several distinct genera, viz. Neospora, 
Toxoplasma, Isospora, Besnoitia, Hammondia, Sarcocystis, 
Cyclospora, and Cryptosporidium, normally found in the 
intestinal tract ( Calero-Bernal and Gennari, 2019 ). The 
Apicomplexan intracellular protozoan parasite Toxoplasma 
gondii is responsible for toxoplasmosis which is present 
worldwide. T. gondii requires two hosts for the completion 
of its life cycle and virtually can infect all warm-blooded 
animals. Domestic cats including all other members of the 
feline family are definitive hosts, while all other warm-
blooded animals are considered intermediate hosts includ -
ing humans and dogs. However, felines can also act as 
intermediate hosts of T. gondii (Kostopoulou et al., 2017 ). 
T. gondii is prevalent worldwide and capable of infecting 
birds and animals. Cats shed the oocysts of this parasite in 
their feces which is only the mechanism for the transmis -
sion of diseases to other organisms. Animals can acquire 
this infection through the ingestion of infective oocysts 
from contaminated food, water, soil, or some other mate -
rials. The excystation of oocysts rapidly occurs in the in -
testine of the host developing into a highly infective form 
of tachyzoite ( Dantas-Torres and Figueredo, 2006 ). The 
excystation depends upon the pH, temperature, bile salts, 
and trypsin present in the intestinal environment of the 
host. After the formation of tachyzoites, the establishment 
of cysts in the tissue occurs. If any member of the feline 
consumes the infected tissue or contaminated fecal mate -
rial, they get infected and shed oocysts in their feces, and 
in this way, the cycle repeats. People acquire this infection 
through the accidental consumption of feline fecal mate -
rial, contaminated water and food, and undercooked meat 
having cysts. There is also transplacental transmission from 
the mother to her offspring or through transfusion of blood 
(Al-Malki, 2021). Acute infection is mostly asymptomatic 
in cats. Other symptoms include anorexia, fever, blind -
ness, cough, jaundice, and diarrhea. The clinical signs in 
dogs include tremors, ataxia, and paralysis along with the 
previously described symptoms. Its diagnosis can be made 
through microscopic examination of a blood smear, sero -
logical tests, hemagglutination test, indirect hemagglutina -
tion test, ELISA, and PCR. Antibiotics can be administered 
to treat this infection such as sulfadiazine (Fig. 2).
FIG. 2 Mechanism of transmission of toxoplasmosis from definitive hosts to intermediate hosts including humans.

482 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
4.2 Giardiasis
The parasite Giardia is frequently detected in animals. 
There are at least four species of Giardia that infect domes-
tic animals including human beings and become the cause 
of giardiasis. These are flagellate species that are found in 
the intestinal tract of domestic and wild animals including 
birds. The four morphologically distinct species are Giardia 
psittaci and G. ardeae which infect birds, G. microti which 
cause disease in voles and muskrats, and Giardia duodena-
lis (also called G. lamblia or G. intestinalis) form a complex 
that infect a wide variety of warm-blooded animals (Szwabe 
and Błaszkowska, 2017). Its life cycle is comprised of two 
stages, viz. the trophozoite (active and motile form found in 
the intestine) and the cyst (environmentally resistant stage 
responsible for the transmission). The cysts of Giardia can 
survive outside the host environment for months in cold and 
wet conditions but are susceptible to a dry and hot environ-
ment. On the other hand, trophozoites can be shed in the 
feces of cats and dogs who suffered from diarrhea but are 
unable to survive outside the host environment for a sig -
nificant time. The prevalence of giardiasis is more in young 
dogs and cats as compared to old ones (Matos et al., 2015). 
The mode of transmission of cysts is through the fecal-oral 
route. Animals can ingest them with contaminated food and 
become infected. Excystation of these cysts inside the small 
intestine (duodenum) occurs with the help of gastric and 
pancreatic enzymes. The trophozoites which are originated 
become attached to the lining of the intestine and become 
the source of pathogenesis (Matos et al., 2015).
The pathogenic contribution of Giardia includes disrup-
tion of normal intestinal microflora, toxin production, in -
flammation and inhibits the normal enzymatic production 
of enterocytes. The clinical signs in dogs and cats range 
from subclinical to slight abdominal discomfort or may be-
come severe enough to cause cramping and abdominal pain. 
Soft to watery diarrhea having mucus on the surface and a 
strong smell is observed in dogs and cats which is usually 
self-limited in immunocompetent pets. Its diagnosis can be 
made depending on the findings of trophozoites in direct wet 
mount fecal smear. Other methods include centrifugal fecal 
flotation, enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA), 
or polymerase chain reaction (PCR). Metronidazole is the 
drug of choice for the treatment of diarrhea and giardiasis 
in dogs and cats (Matos et al., 2015).
4.3 Babesiosis
Babesiosis is a tick-borne disease that is caused by in -
traerythrocytic apicomplexan parasites of the genus Babesia 
that infect a wide variety of domestic and wild animals in -
cluding humans. Its mode of transmission is through the 
bite of infective ticks which transfer the causative agent to 
healthy animals upon their feed ( Dalrymple et  al., 1992). 
The stages of their life cycle include sporozoite, mero -
zoite, and trophozoite. Babesia canis , B. rossi, B. vogeli,  
B. gibsoni, B. conradae, and B. microti are responsible for 
babesiosis in dogs while B. felis is the causative agent for 
babesiosis in cats. However, the prevalence of babesiosis 
in a feline is rare compared to canines. The pathological 
changes that occur in the host vary depending on the type 
of the species that infect the immune status of the host, age, 
and concurrent infection (Esch and Petersen, 2013).
The most clinical signs of babesiosis in canines and 
felines include hemolytic anemia and systemic inflamma -
tory response syndrome. Hemolytic anemia occurs due to 
the destruction of red blood cells (extravascular and intra -
vascular hemolysis). The clinical signs of acute babesiosis 
in dogs and cats include fever, anorexia, dehydration, ane -
mia, icterus, and lethargy. Babesiosis can be diagnosed by 
detecting Babesia spp. in stained blood smear, or flow cy -
tometry. PCR and serological testing can also be employed 
to detect babesiosis. Imidocarb dipropionate is the drug of 
choice for the treatment of babesiosis. While some other 
drugs can also be used to treat this infection such as dimina-
zene aceturate (Dalrymple et al., 1992).
4.4 Hepatozoonosis
Hepatozoonosis is caused by the apicomplexan parasite 
Hepatozoon species. These parasites infect dogs, and only 
a few subclinical cases of this disease are diagnosed in cats 
so far. All species of hepatozoon share a common life cycle 
consisting of an invertebrate definitive host and a verte -
brate intermediate host. Unless other vector-borne diseases 
spread through the bite of arthropod vectors, this is also a 
vector-borne disease and spread only through the ingestion 
of a vector (definitive host) containing Hepatozoon oocysts. 
The definitive host of this disease are blood-sucking inverte-
brates such as flies, fleas, ticks, mites, tsetse flies, sand flies, 
mosquitoes, lice, leeches, and bugs and the intermediate 
hosts include a wide variety of animals such as mammals, 
birds, amphibians, reptiles, and marsupials (Irwin and Traub, 
2006). The other modes of transmission include eating meat 
containing small tissue cysts (termed monozoic, cystozoites, 
or dizoic cysts) and transplacental transmission. The impor-
tant species of Hepatozoon are H. canis, H. Americanum, 
and H. felis with the first two causing disease in dogs and the 
third in cats, respectively (Dubey et al., 1990). The H. canis 
infection in dogs varies from subclinical in healthy dogs to 
severe and life-threatening in anemic and lethargic animals. 
The clinical symptoms include fever, anorexia, lethargy, 
weight loss, muscle pain, and discharge from the eyes and 
nose. It can be diagnosed microscopically (observation of 
neutrophils containing parasites), an indirect fluorescent an-
tibody test for anti-H. canis antibody detection, and ELISA. 
Imidocarb dipropionate is the drug of choice for the treat -
ment of hepatozoonosis in dogs (Dubey et al., 1990).

Parasitic diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 32  483
4.5 Neosporosis
Neospora caninum  is the causative agent of neosporo -
sis in dogs and other animals. It is a protozoan parasite 
that causes myositis and encephalomyelitis in animals. 
The natural mode of transmission of N. caninum  is only 
transplacental. This parasite closely resembles those of 
Toxoplasma gondii ( Dubey et  al., 2020 ). This parasite is 
also responsible for paralysis and death in dogs and causes 
mortality of neonates and abortion in cattle, buffalo, goats, 
sheep, and mares. The clinical signs of neosporosis in dogs 
include ascending paralysis (hind legs are more severely 
affected than the front legs), paralysis of the jaw, swallow -
ing difficulty, and flaccidity and atrophy of the muscles. 
Subclinically infected mothers can transmit pathogens 
to their fetuses which are born infected ( Petersen, 2009 ). 
There is no report of neosporosis in cats, but felines are 
susceptible and can become infected experimentally. The 
severity of this disease is more in lactating cats as com -
pared to nonlactating cats. An indirect fluorescent antibody 
test can be used to identify this disease. The choice of treat-
ment includes clindamycin, pyrimethamine, or sulfadia -
zine (Dubey et al., 2020; Petersen, 2009).
5 Internal parasitic diseases of dogs  
and cats
Many helminths infect cats and dogs and lead to the mor -
bidity and mortality of the host. Generally, these helminths 
include nematodes, trematodes, and cestodes. The main 
route of transmission of the disease is the fecal-oral route, 
but many parasites require an intermediate host for their de-
velopment to become infective and cause disease in their 
definitive host. The reproduction of parasites including 
sexual and asexual mode of reproduction occur inside the 
definitive host while in the intermediate host only the devel-
opment and growth of the infective stage of parasites occur. 
Here are discussed certain parasitic diseases of dogs and 
cats (Kumsa et al., 2019).
5.1 Dirofilariasis (heartworm disease)
Canine and feline heartworm disease is caused by the fi -
larial nematode parasite Dirofilaria immitis  which is an 
important endoparasite from both economic and patho -
logic points of view. This protozoan parasite is transmitted 
by mosquitoes. The definitive host of this parasite is dogs 
while cats are also infected by D. immitis. The main site of 
the worm and initial damage is in the pulmonary arteries, 
and the heart is only involved in the last stage of the disease 
(Ballweber et al., 2010). Sexual reproduction of D. immitis 
occurs in the pulmonary arteries and newborn microfilariae 
are released into the circulatory system of the host. The oc-
currence of this infection is more severe in cats which act 
as atypical hosts. In cats, death occur by just a few adults 
or developing filariae. Dogs and cats are the most impor -
tant mammalian species infected by D. immitis worldwide 
(Kumsa et al., 2019).
Unlike other nematodes, they exhibit a complex life 
cycle comprising multiple stages of development in both 
definitive host and intermediate host (mosquito). They 
have no free-living stage and live as obligate endopara -
sites mainly in the pulmonary artery and lobar arteries of 
the host (canines). Mosquitoes acquire microfilaria during 
blood feeding on the infected host and act as a vector. In 
the mosquito, they migrate from the midgut to Malpighian 
tubules where morphological changes occur in them and 
become first-stage larvae. After molting several times, they 
change into the L3 stage, and transmission to a healthy ver-
tebrate host occurs when mosquitoes again feed on them 
(Colella et al., 2020 ). The clinical manifestation of dirofi -
lariasis in dogs and cats is usually chronic, and mostly in -
fected animals do not show the clinical symptoms of this 
disease for a long time. Gradually symptoms of this disease 
develop with a chronic cough followed by dyspnea, weak -
ness, anorexia, weight loss, and dehydration. Crackles are 
heard over the caudal lobe of the lungs. These parasites are 
prevalent worldwide and their clinical signs in dogs include 
mild persistent cough, anorexia, and exercise intolerant. 
There is an obstruction in the flow of blood and right-side 
heart failure occurs. Cats are very less immunologically in-
tolerant as compared to dogs and as a result, clinical symp-
toms are different in cats in contrast to dogs ( Kumsa et al., 
2019). Clinical symptoms in cats include labored breathing, 
chronic cough, vomiting, and even death with no apparent 
appearance of other clinical signs. In cats, the death of mi -
crofilariae results in severe pulmonary symptoms, and this 
condition is termed heartworm-associated respiratory dis -
ease (Ballweber et al., 2010).
Diagnosis of heartworm can be made through the de -
tection of circulating microfilariae or blood tests for adult 
female antigens. Different serological, molecular, and para-
sitological tests are available to find different developing 
stages of parasites in the host. Microscopically, they can 
also be detected in direct blood smear. Further diagnostic 
procedures can also be adopted such as radiographs and 
electrocardiography. The treatment protocol for D. immitis 
infection in dogs requires a prolonged drug therapy regi -
men, restriction of exercise, and sometimes even surgery. 
When the worm burden is high in the right cardiac cham -
ber, surgical therapy is advised along with the symptomatic 
treatment for the pulmonary and cardiac signs. Restriction 
of exercise and cage rest is essential to improve cardiopul -
monary circulation and pulmonary hypertension reduction 
(Ballweber et al., 2010 ). The current therapy includes the 
prevention of this parasite using medications such as mac -
rocyclic lactones, e.g., ivermectin, moxidectin, and milbe -
mycin oxime (Kumsa et al., 2019) (Fig. 3).

484 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
5.2 Leishmaniasis
Leishmaniasis is caused by Leishmania species. There 
are two forms of this disease, namely the cutaneous form 
and the visceral form caused by L. mexicana and L. infan-
tum, respectively. It is usually transmitted through the bite 
of a female sandfly (phlebotomine). There is also a verti -
cal transmission of leishmaniasis in dogs and cats either 
through the transplacental or transmammary route. Dogs 
are zoonotically important because they act as a reservoir 
host and can transmit the infection to human beings. The 
clinical signs of L. infantum  infection in dogs vary from 
asymptomatic to fatal ( Curtis, 2004). The clinical signs in 
canine and feline include splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, and 
enlarged lymph nodes. The cutaneous form of the diseases 
in cats and dogs is characterized by initially a single papule 
which is enlarged into a nodule and may become ulcerative. 
While the visceral form of the disease is characterized by 
loss of body weight, depression, serosanguineous nasal 
discharge, splenomegaly, rough hair coat, and generalized 
lymphadenopathy. Other clinical signs of a visceral form 
may include vomiting, diarrhea, and melena. There is also 
nonpruritic alopecia, excessive epidermal scale with thick -
ening, depigmentation, hyperkeratosis, and chapping of 
food pads and muzzle occur in both forms of leishmaniasis 
(Curtis, 2004).
5.3 Toxocariasis
Toxocariasis is a disease caused by roundworm Toxocara 
cati and Toxocara canis which are common gastrointestinal 
helminths of cats and dogs, respectively. Their transmis -
sion occurs through the fecal-oral route. Healthy animals 
can acquire infection through the ingestion of embryonated 
eggs or tissue of paratenic hosts containing infective larvae. 
Transplacental transmission during the gestation period 
from mother to fetus or transmammary during lactation in 
young kittens and pups is also possible (Solano-Gallego and 
Baneth, 2011). Dogs and cats are the definitive hosts. After 
the ingestion of eggs, infective larvae hatch in the intestine 
and their juvenile stage fails to develop into mature worms, 
start wandering inside the body of the host and cause dam -
age to tissue from where they travel. There are two types of 
migration of larvae in the host, viz. visceral larval migration 
and cutaneous larval migration depending on the immune 
status of the victim. If a dog or cat is somewhat resistant to 
infection, then there will be cutaneous migration and vice 
versa (Kumsa et al., 2019).
The symptoms of toxocariasis and the degree of the host 
damage caused by migrating larvae vary depending on the 
tissue invaded, age of the dogs and cats, number, location, 
and developmental stage of the worms (Solano-Gallego and 
Baneth, 2011). The most sensitive organs include the lungs, 
liver, eyes, and the central nervous system. The clinical 
manifestation of light infection of Toxocara in young and 
adult dogs and cats is usually asymptomatic or merely asso-
ciated with no weight gain. Stillbirths occur due to prenatal 
infection, and those who survived will die within 3  weeks 
of birth (Kumsa et al., 2019). The other clinical symptoms 
of this disease include fever, hepatomegaly, splenomegaly, 
lower respiratory symptoms such as bronchospasm, urti -
caria, pneumonia, vomiting, diarrhea, and in some animals 
constipation, obstruction of the intestine, rupture of the 
intestine, gallbladder, bile duct, and pancreatic duct may 
occur ( Solano-Gallego and Baneth, 2011 ). If there is the 
involvement of the CNS, then encephalopathy and other 
FIG. 3 Transmission of heartworms from infected animals to healthy animals via mosquito (vector).

Parasitic diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 32  485
neurological symptoms may occur. There is granuloma for-
mation in the retina if the eyes are involved. The visceral 
form of diseases can be diagnosed based on immunologi -
cal tests such as ELISA. Albendazole (anthelmintic drug) is 
the treatment of choice for this disease. But as far as ocular 
signs are concerned, vitrectomy along with anthelmintics 
and corticosteroids can be opted for (Genchi et al., 2019).
5.4 Ancylostomiasis
Hookworms are the cause of Ancylostomiasis in dogs and 
cats which include Ancylostoma caninum , Ancylostoma 
ceylanicum, and Ancylostoma braziliense . The survival 
ability of hookworms increases in tropical climates.  
A. tubaeforme only infects cats and other species of wild 
felids. Ancylostoma is transmitted through the fecal-oral 
route. The third larval developmental stage is the infective 
stage of Ancylostoma which can withstand both cold and 
heat but is not able to face extreme dryness. A. caninum in 
dogs can also be transmitted through transmammary route. 
These parasites suck a large proportion of blood from the 
host and make them anemic ( Solano-Gallego and Baneth, 
2011). However, the severity of the disease depends on the 
age of the animals, the nutritional status of dogs and cats, 
and the worm burden. Ancylostomiasis is characterized by 
bloody diarrhea, anemia, hypoproteinemia, and death can 
also occur. In the case of cutaneous larval migrans, hyperke-
ratinization, acanthosis, and serpentine tracks are observed 
which are made by recently passed larvae in interdigital 
skin. Eggs shed with feces can be diagnosed with a micro -
scope. Supportive therapy should be administered before 
specific treatment in case of acute infection of dogs and 
cats. The treatment of choice for Ancylostomiasis hook -
worms includes oral administration of pyrantel pamoate or 
febantel (Solano-Gallego and Baneth, 2011).
6 Ectoparasites infesting dogs and cats
Ectoparasites act as vectors and reservoirs for many patho -
gens and prefer to infest dogs and cats where they transmit 
various diseases and are directly or indirectly involved in de-
teriorating the health of animals. The most common ectopar-
asites include ticks, mites, fleas, and lice. Ctenocephalides 
canis and Ctenocephalides felis are the fleas of dogs and 
cats respectively. C. felis is a vector for several pathogens 
such as Bartonella clarridgeiae, B. henselae, and Rickettsia 
felis which cause various diseases in cats and dogs. Fleas 
also act as the intermediate host for certain helminths such 
as Dipylidium caninum (Baneth, 2011).
Ticks are the most important ectoparasites that affect the 
health of dogs and cats worldwide. Ticks feed on the blood 
of the host which makes them anemic and prone to vari -
ous diseases. Ticks are also responsible for the paralysis of 
the host. Ticks are vectors and reservoirs for many  zoonotic 
pathogens such as Anaplasma, Ehrlichia, Borrelia, and 
Rickettsia which cause emerging zoonotic diseases in hu -
mans as well (Eckert et al., 2001).
Lice are also one of the most important ectoparasites 
of domestic animals including dogs and cats. In infested 
pets, they may cause dermatological lesions, unthriftiness, 
anemia, biting and rubbing, alopecia due to scratching, and 
secondary skin infections. The lice of dogs are Trichodectes 
canis, Heterodoxus spiniger, and Linognathus setosus while 
there is only one louse of cat, namely Felicola subrostra-
tus which is prevalent worldwide (Wright et al., 2020). All 
these ectoparasites are directly involved in restlessness, 
rough hair coat, loss of appetite, weight loss, and anemia.
6.1 Scabies
Scabies is a disease of the skin caused by sarcoptic mange 
which is nonseasonal and highly contagious. It makes skin 
pruritic. The causative agent of this disease in burrowing 
mites is known as Sarcoptes scabiei. This disease affects 
several mammalian species and the variant responsible for 
scabies in dogs is S. scabiei var. canis. In contrast, S. acari-
osis is a mite responsible for a pruritic skin condition in 
cats, but this disease is rare (Dantas-Torres et al., 2020). The 
transmission of mites from infected animals to healthy ani-
mals occurs through direct contact, but it can also be trans-
mitted indirectly through fomites. The most common sites 
of infestation in dogs and cats are elbow, hocks, pinna mar-
gins, and periocular skin which are clinically characterized 
by pruritic and papulocrustous dermatosis. The infestation 
of mites can be detected by skin scraping or ELISA. The 
common treatment protocol for this is the use of acaricidal 
drugs such as amitraz, fipronil, and ivermectin ( Nguyen 
et al., 2021) (Table 1).
7 Control of parasitic diseases in dogs 
and cats
Dogs and cats are companion animals that are naturally ex-
posed to a variety of parasites, including endoparasites and 
ectoparasites. These parasites are prevalent worldwide, and 
many of them are of zoonotic concern. Therefore, there is 
an urgent need to minimize the risks of transmission of par-
asites and morbidity through environmental hygiene, good 
nutrition, year-round preventive measures for ectoparasites 
which acts as a vector for the transmission of various dis -
eases, and deworming practices for the endoparasites of 
companion animals (Dubey et al., 2009).
Endoparasites prevention must be started at a young age 
of animals and be supported with proper nutrition and hy -
giene. The maintenance of cleanliness in the houses is very 
important to prevent the contamination of food as most of 
the parasites are transmitted through the fecal-oral route. 
When litter boxes are used for pets, fecal material daily

TABLE 1 List of different parasitic diseases of dogs and cats.
Disease name Etiology Transmission Clinical sign Treatment References
Toxoplasmosis Toxoplasma gondii The fecal-oral route, 
transplacental, undercooked meat 
having cysts, blood transfusion
Anorexia, fever, blindness, cough, jaundice, diarrhea, 
tremors, ataxia, and paralysis
Sulfadiazine Al-Malki (2021) and 
Dantas-Torres and 
Figueredo (2006)
Giardiasis Giardia duodenalis Fecal-oral route Cramping, abdominal pain, soft to watery diarrhea, Metronidazole Matos et al. (2015)
Babesiosis Babesia canis, B. rossi, 
B. vogeli, B. gibsoni, 
B. conradae, B. microti, B. felis
Tick bite Fever, anorexia, dehydration, anemia, icterus, lethargy Imidocarb 
dipropionate, 
diminazene aceturate
Dalrymple et al. 
(1992)
Hepatozoonosis Hepatozoon canis, H. 
americanum, H. felis
Bite of flies, fleas, ticks, 
mites, tsetse flies, sand flies, 
mosquitoes, lice, leeches, and 
bugs, transplacental transmission, 
contaminated meat containing cyst
Fever, anorexia, lethargy, weight loss, muscle pain, 
discharge from the eyes and nose
Imidocarb 
dipropionate
Dubey et al. (1990)
Neosporosis Neospora caninum Transplacental Ascending paralysis (hind legs are more severely affected 
than the front legs), paralysis of the jaw, swallowing 
difficulty, and flaccidity and atrophy of the muscles
Clindamycin, 
pyrimethamine, or 
sulfadiazine
Dubey et al. (2020)
Dirofilariasis Dirofilaria immitis Bite of an infected mosquito In dogs, signs are mild persistent cough, anorexia, and 
exercise intolerant while in cats’ signs include labored 
breathing, chronic cough, vomiting, and even death
Ivermectin, 
moxidectin, 
milbemycin oxime
Kumsa et al. (2019)
Leishmaniasis Leishmania mexicana, 
L. infantum
Bite of female sandfly, 
transplacental, transmammary 
mammary
Nonpruritic alopecia, excessive epidermal scale with 
thickening, depigmentation, hyperkeratosis, weight loss, 
depression, distension of the abdomen
 Curtis (2004)
Toxocariasis Toxocara cati, Toxocara canis The fecal-oral route, 
transplacental, transmammary 
mammary
No weight gain, stillbirth, including fever, hepatomegaly, 
splenomegaly, lower respiratory symptoms, urticaria, 
vomiting, diarrhea
Albendazole Kumsa et al. (2019)
Ancylostomiasis Ancylostoma caninum, 
A. ceylanicum, A. braziliense, 
A. tubaeforme
The fecal-oral route, 
transmammary mammary
Bloody diarrhea, anemia, hypoproteinemia, 
keratinization, acanthosis, and death
Pyrantel pamoate or 
febantel
Solano-Gallego and 
Baneth (2011)
Scabies Sarcoptes scabiei, S. acariosis Direct contact with infected 
animals, fomites
Pruritic and papulocrustous dermatosis Amitraz, fipronil, and 
ivermectin
Dantas-Torres et al. 
(2020)

Parasitic diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 32  487
 removal and disposal is very necessary. The area where 
dogs are kept and their breeding facilities must be disin -
fected with an effective disinfectant such as 1% sodium 
hypochlorite solution, chloroxylenol, chlorocresol, or 10% 
iodine to reduce and kill the protozoon cysts, helminths 
eggs, and larvae (Baneth et al., 2016).
Proper nutrition of the animals is also essential to en -
hance the immunity of the pets which ultimately helps them 
to fight infection. Ticks and other insects such as fleas, and 
mosquitoes are also sources of disease transmission. For the 
prevention and control of these insects, an insect killer and 
repellent must be used on the premises where dogs and cats 
are kept reducing or even vanishing vector-borne insects. 
Whenever an infection is identified, proper treatment of the 
animals with an efficacious drug is necessary to further pre-
vent the damages caused by them (Xhaxhiu et al., 2009).
8 Conclusion
In this chapter, we have discussed certain parasitic diseases 
of dogs and cats. These animals are the definitive hosts 
of many parasites and can act as a reservoir for the trans -
mission of diseases to other healthy individuals. Humans 
can acquire infection from companion animals because of 
their close association with them. The proper knowledge of 
the parasitic diseases of dogs and cats is very essential to 
prevent them. Many parasitic drugs such as antiprotozoal, 
anthelmintics, and antiacaricides are developed that are ef -
fective against a wide range of parasites and can kill them. 
To control the diseases caused by parasites, the proper de -
worming of the animals is important.
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank all other coauthors for providing guidance 
and support.

488 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats

489

Chapter 33
Mycoplasma, Rickettsia, and Chlamydia 
diseases of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
There are numerous opportunistic and vector-borne ill -
nesses that affect dogs and cats worldwide, including 
mycoplasmal, rickettsial, and chlamydial diseases. Our 
understanding of these agents has increased because to the 
creation of sensitive, specific PCR assays, and PCR is cur -
rently the tool of choice for diagnosing and differentiating 
various species (Willi et al., 2010 ). This presentation aims 
to shed light on the potential significance of mycoplasmal, 
rickettsial, and chlamydial illnesses in dogs and cats with 
regard to their origin, symptoms, modes of transmission, 
diagnosis, and treatment.
1.1 Mycoplasma infections in dogs and cats
Mycoplasma species are regarded as typical flora in the up-
per respiratory system, although their role in lower respira-
tory tract infections is controversial. Because Mycoplasma 
infections in cats and dogs are rarely found cytologically 
and must be detected by a specific culture or polymerase 
chain reaction (PCR), they are challenging to diagnose 
(Dear, 2020).
1.1.1 Etiology and different species
Fastidious organisms without a cell wall, mycoplasmas 
are the smallest known free-living organisms (0.3–0.8 m 
in length) and are members of the Mollicutes class (the 
name means “soft skin”). They were initially discovered 
in dogs in Japan in 1934 ( Baseman and Tully, 1997 ). 
Many organisms require sterols to thrive, whereas spe -
cies of Ureaplasma require urea to ferment. Seven dif -
ferent Ureaplasma species and more than 120 different 
Mycoplasma species have been identified. The range of 
mycoplasma species that infect or are present in dogs and 
cats is still not fully characterized because precise species 
identification has been difficult (Spergser and Rosengarten, 
2007). Future Mycoplasma species discovery is projected 
to increase as a result of molecular technology utilization. 
Some Mycoplasma species can infect a variety of host spe-
cies. Mycoplasmas are notoriously challenging to grow on 
cell-free media, and some, like hemotropic mycoplasmas, 
have never been successfully cultured in the lab (Hartmann 
et al., 2010 ). All mammalian species’ mucous membranes 
include commensal microorganisms called mycoplasmas. 
Numerous Mycoplasma species colonizing simultaneously 
is not unusual. Mycoplasmas are associated with kerato -
conjunctivitis and/or upper respiratory tract disease in cats, 
reproductive disease and urinary tract infections in dogs, 
and lower respiratory tract disease, skin and soft tissue 
infections, meningoencephalitis, and arthritis in both cats 
and dogs (Beauchamp et al., 2011). It has been challenging 
to assess mycoplasmas’ role in ocular, upper respiratory, 
and urogenital tract disease because they are frequently 
isolated from the genitalia and upper respiratory tracts of 
healthy dogs and cats. Recent research has revealed that 
Mycoplasma prevalence is higher in cats with conjunctivi -
tis or URTD than in healthy cats (Holst et al., 2010).
Mycoplasmas can act as secondary invaders when other 
harmful viruses and bacteria are present, or when the typi -
cal host defenses are weakened by ailments like neoplasia 
or immunosuppressive drugs. Mycoplasmas are usually 
associated with pneumonia or systemic disease in young 
animals (1 year). Mycoplasma cynos  ( M. cynos ) has been 
linked to a more pathogenic lower respiratory illness in 
dogs ( Rycroft et  al., 2007 ), whereas infection with other 
species like Mycoplasma spumans , Mycoplasma canis , 
and Mycoplasma gateae could not cause it. It appears that 
pathogenecity varies among different Mycoplasma species 
(Rosendal, 1978 ). On the other hand, no correlation be -
tween the feline infection with Mycoplasmas in their lower 
urinary tract and lymphoplasmacytic pododermatitis was 
found using molecular approaches ( Bettenay et al., 2007 ) 
(Table 1).
Small ( <1 mm), discoid-shaped, cell wall-free he -
motropic mycoplasmas (hemoplasmas), which are in -
timately connected to the red blood cells of affected 
animals. They used to go by the names Haemobartonella

490 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
and Eperythrozoon species, and they are the infectious 
anemia-causing agents in a number of mammalian spe -
cies. As our understanding of bacterial genomic sequences 
has grown, these entities under the genus Mycoplasma 
have been reclassified as hemotropic mycoplasmas. 
Hemoplasma infections can cause acute hemolysis, which 
is accompanied by anorexia, lethargy, dehydration, weight 
loss, and unexpected animal mortality. The ability to study 
hemotropic mycoplasmas has been constrained by the in -
ability to culture these organisms in  vitro. However, re -
cently created species-specific PCR assays enable a more 
thorough assessment of the etiology and epidemiology of 
Hemoplasma infections in cats and dogs ( Neimark et al., 
2001).
1.1.2 Transmission of mycoplasmosis
Lower respiratory tract infections are often thought to 
have an endogenous cause; upper respiratory tract infec -
tions with canine and feline mycoplasmas are common, 
albeit not consistently so. However, because the viru -
lence traits of canine and feline mycoplasmas have not 
been well confirmed, the possibility of external trans -
mission cannot be fully ruled out. Each Mycoplasma  
species’ specific location and relative abundance inside 
the respiratory system are unclear. The mucous mem -
branes of the gastrointestinal tract and urogenital system 
can also harbor some Mycoplasma   species that are con -
nected to respiratory disorders. Different Mycoplasma  
species may be discovered in dogs, cats, and other 
 animals ( Rosendal, 1979 ). Even though fleas or ticks 
have been suggested as potential natural carriers, the 
 manner of hemoplasmas transmission is still unknown 
(Novacco et al., 2010 ).
1.1.3 Signs of Mycoplasmosis in dogs and cats
Infections with Mycoplasma typically affect the urogenital 
and pulmonary systems. In immunocompromised patients 
and neonates, mycoplasmas can potentially result in sys -
temic infections ( Bébéar and Bébéar, 2002 ). Clinical ex -
aminations of feline and canine pulmonary Mycoplasma 
infections are scarce. Most isolates have been obtained 
from the lung tissues of animals that had died of pneu -
monia; among the most frequently seen clinical symptoms 
were fever, emaciation, lethargy, dyspnea, chronic cough, 
and crackles. Chronic Mycoplasma colonization has been 
detected in dogs with primary ciliary dyskinesia ( Kirchner 
et  al., 1990 ). When a dog was necropsied for unrelated 
reasons, it was discovered that it also had mild, acute 
symptoms consistent with infected canine tracheobronchi -
tis in addition to pneumonia macroscopic lesions. Other 
dogs in the same kennel noticed comparable symptoms, 
and they all fully recovered. Experimentally, M. cynos  
infection caused tiny pneumonia lesions in dogs, but no 
clinical symptoms were seen. Early phases of the micro -
scopic pathology of naturally occurring and experimental 
Mycoplasma pneumonia in dogs and cats include puru -
lent bronchitis and bronchiolitis, with different degrees 
of bronchiectasis and epithelial destruction. Bronchitis 
obliterans, interstitial pneumonia, bronchial and bronchio -
lar epithelial hyperplasia, and peribronchial and perivas -
cular lymphoid hyperplasia are among the latter phases 
(Rosendal, 1978 ). Mycoplasmas colonize both ciliated 
and nonciliated surfaces in the respiratory tract and are 
normally segregated from systemic body sites ( Hooper 
et al., 1985).
1.1.4 Diagnosis of mycoplasmosis
Traditional biological techniques have been used to iden -
tify Mycoplasma and make a laboratory diagnosis of my -
coplasmal infections, including morphology, cultural traits, 
physiological and serological features (Razin, 2006). While 
the conventional tests continue to be very important in the 
diagnosis of Mycoplasma, novel assays based on molecu -
lar analysis of genomic DNA, ribosomal RNAs, eukary -
otic proteins, and lipids are beginning to take their place. 
Because of this, it is possible to forecast that the molecular 
tests will soon replace the conventional tests as the pre -
ferred approach for identifying Mycoplasma, especially in 
the case of slow-growing and/or extremely picky species. 
The two volumes of Methods in Mycoplasmology offer 
an organized and thorough overview and evaluation of the 
conventional methods for identifying mycoplasmas ( Razin 
TABLE 1 Different nonhemotropic Mycoplasma and 
Ureaplasma species found in dogs and cats according to 
Sykes (2013).
Species Causative agents
Dogs Mycoplasma cynos
M. canis
Mycoplasma molare
Mycoplasma arginini
Mycoplasma 
bovigenitalium
Mycoplasma edwardii
Mycoplasma 
feliminutum
M. felis
Mycoplasma gateae
M. maculosum
M. opalescens
Mycoplasma spumans
M. sp. HRC689
M. sp. VJC358
Ureaplasma 
canigenitalium
Acholeplasma laidlawii
Cats M. felis
M. gateae
M. arginini
M. feliminutum
M. canadense
M. cynos
Mycoplasma lipophilum
Mycoplasma 
hyopharyngis
Ureaplasma felinum
Ureaplasma cati
A. laidlawii

Mycoplasma, Rickettsia, and Chlamydia diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 33  491
and Tully, 1983). While the more modern molecular tech -
niques are found in the two extra volumes of Molecular and 
Diagnostic Procedures in Mycoplasmology ( Razin, 2002). 
Serological tests have been utilized frequently, especially 
for determining the species and strains of Mycoplasma. In 
some instances, mycoplasmosis can be diagnosed using 
tests based on the principles of immunobinding ( Kotani 
and McGarrity, 1986 ), immunoblotting ( Rastawicki et al., 
1996), immunoperoxidase tests ( Bencina and Bradbury, 
1992), and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA 
or EIA), which uses polyclonal or monoclonal antibodies 
(Ferwerda et al., 2001).
1.1.5 Treatment of mycoplasmosis
See Table 2.
1.2 Rickettsial infections in dogs and cats
In order to group viruses and small, obligatory, intracellular 
gram-negative bacteria known as rickettsiae, which are fre-
quently used to identify viruses-caused illnesses ( Gillespie 
et al., 2009). In North America, rickettsial-related illness in 
dogs is rather prevalent. The two conditions that are most 
frequently identified are ehrlichiosis and Rocky Mountain 
spotted fever. The obligatory intracellular parasites known 
as rickettsial agents are spread by ticks. Deciduous forests, 
warm temperatures, and higher humidity all encourage the 
growth of ticks, which in turn encourages the spread of rick-
ettsial agents (Stiles, 2000).
1.2.1 Etiology, signs, and methods  
of transmission
In general, canine and feline vector-borne infections of 
rickettsial agents, including those in the genera Anaplasma, 
Ehrlichia, Neorickettsia, and Rickettsia, are significant and 
frequent. These pathogens can cause disease that is clini -
cally undetectable to severe and even lethal ( Allison and 
Little, 2013 ). For the maintenance of infection in nature 
and for transfer from infected to native hosts, all canine and 
feline rickettsial diseases need a vector. Transmission by 
contaminated blood products or unintentional direct con -
tact with infected vertebrate or vector tissues has also been 
documented (Leiby and Gill, 2004 ). The majority of these 
agents are primarily transmitted by arthropods, mainly ticks 
and fleas; however, some species of the genus Neorickettsia 
are also spread by digenean trematodes (flukes). Arthropods 
are the primary means of rickettsial pathogen transmission. 
For the majority of these diseases, transmission times have 
not been identified, but generally speaking, for the tick-
borne rickettsial agents, transmission is thought to occur 
within the first 4–24 h of tick attachment ( Nicholson et al., 
2010). When a dog or cat consumes an intermediate host 
that contains infective metacercariae carrying the bacteria, 
rickettsial agents on trematode vectors are then transmitted 
to the intermediate host (Bowman et al., 2009) (Table 3).
1.2.2 Diagnosis of rickettsial agents
Microscopic visualization
Since members of the Anaplasmataceae family infect he -
matopoietic cells, many of them can be observed under a 
microscope in a variety of clinical samples, such as periph-
eral blood, bone marrow, tissue aspirates, and body fluids 
like CSF and synovial fluid. Cytologic samples are pre -
ferred since normal histopathologic sections cannot reveal 
the organisms without immunohistochemistry ( Dawson 
et  al., 2001 ). Peripheral blood typically contains germs 
from the genera Ehrlichia and Anaplasma. Bacteria grow 
through binary fission within cytoplasmic vacuoles despite 
having an average diameter of less than 0.5  m to generate 
microcolonies or morulae (Popov et al., 1998). Morulae can 
reach a diameter of 4–6  μm and can contain numerous or 
few different species. The two morphologic forms of bacte-
ria that have been classified in terms of their ultrastructure 
are dense-cored cells, which are more loosely packed, and 
reticulate cells, which are firmly packed inside of morulae. 
A single morula frequently includes only one sort of bacte-
rium, not both, as opposed to a mix. This variability may be 
the cause of the different cytoplasmic inclusion appearances 
seen by light microscopy (Popov et al., 1998).
TABLE 2 Predicted antimicrobial susceptibilities of 
mycoplasmas in dogs and cats (Bemis, 1992).
Antimicrobial agent Susceptibility
Ampicillin Resistant
Streptomycin Resistant
First-generation 
cephalosporins
Resistant
Erythromycin Resistant
Gentamicin Moderately susceptible
Chloramphenicol Moderately susceptible
Penicillin G Resistant
Quinolones Moderately susceptible
Extended spectrum penicillins Resistant
Tetracyclines Moderately susceptible
Trimethoprim-sulfadiazine Resistant
Tylosin Susceptible
Polymixins Resistant
Lincosamides Susceptible

TABLE 3 Different rickettsial agents of dogs and cats concerning their geographic distribution, primary vectors, and clinical signs (Allison and Little, 2013).
Causative agent Geographic distribution Primary vector(s) Clinical signs
A. Family: 
Anaplasmataceae
1. Ehrlichia ruminantium – Africa
– Caribbean
Ambloyomma spp. Cats: Not reported
Dogs: Subclinical/rare
2. Ehrlichia chaffeensis – California
– Southern and Eastern US
Amblyomma americanum Cats: not reported
Dogs: Usually mild/subclinical unless 
present in coinfection
3. Neorickettsia risticii – North America – Acanthatrium oregonense
– caddis flies
– aquatic insects
Cats: Experimental
Dogs: Lethargy, vomiting, fever, 
arthritis, and thrombocytopenia
4. Anaplasma phagocytophilum Worldwide Ixodes persulcatus complex 
(Ixodes ricinus, Ixodes 
scapularis, I. pacificus, and 
others)
Cats: Uncommon; fever, 
anorexia, lethargy, arthritis, and 
thrombocytopenia
Dogs: Fever, anorexia, lethargy, 
thrombocytopenia, and polyarthritis
5. Neorickettsia helminthoeca – Columbia
– Brazil
– Northwest US
– British
Trematodes: Nanophyetus 
salmincola
Cats: Not reported
Dogs: Fever, anorexia, diarrhea, 
vomiting, and lymphadenopathy
6. Ehrlichia ewingii – Southern and Eastern US A. americanum Cats: Not reported
Dogs: Fever, polyarthritis, 
thrombocytopenia, and neurologic 
disease
7. Ehrlichia canis Worldwide – Rhipicephalus sanguineus
– Dermacentor variabilis
Cats: Fever, lethargy, and anorexia
Dogs: Fever, lethargy, 
thrombocytopenia, anorexia, myalgia, 
lymphadenopathy, and bleeding 
diatheses
8. Anaplasma platys Worldwide – R. sanguineus
– Dermacentor auratus
Cats: Questionable
Dogs: Cyclic thrombocytopenia

B. Family: 
Rickettsiaceae
1. Typhus Group a. Rickettsia prowazekii – Africa
– Asia
– North and South America
– Lice
– Fleas
Cats: Unknown
Dogs: Subclinical
b. Rickettsia typhi Worldwide Fleas Cats: Subclinical
Dogs: Subclinical
2. Spotted fever groupa a. Rickettsia conorii – India
– Asia
– Europe
– Africa
– Middle East
R. sanguineus Cats: Subclinical
Dogs: Subclinical
b. Rickettsia rickettsii – North and South America – D. variabilis
– Dermacentor andersoni
– Amblyomma cajennense
– R. sanguineus
Cats: Uncommon
Dogs: Subclinical to severe; fever, 
anorexia, lethargy, thrombocytopenia, 
petechial hemorrhages, and neurologic 
signs
3. Transitional group a. Rickettsia akari Worldwide Mouse mites: Liponyssoides 
sanguineus
Cats: Not reported
Dogs: Subclinical
b. Rickettsia felis Worldwide Fleas: Ctenocephalides felis Cats: Subclinical
Dogs: Subclinical
a Spotted fever group includes also numerous other species such as: Rickettsia helvetica, R. japonica, R. parkeri, R. sibirica, Rickettsia massiliae, etc.

494 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
1.2.3 Culture
The only venues where rickettsial agents can be successfully 
isolated in cell culture are frequently research labs. Culture 
is not used as a diagnostic strategy when a specific research 
requirement emerges, such as the confirmation of the exis -
tence of a novel agent, evidence of vector transmission, or the 
description of an agent from a new host species. Culture iso-
lation is more time-consuming than molecular or serologic 
techniques for routine diagnostics, but it is necessary for the 
detailed description and comprehensive characterization of 
organisms in clinical specimens (Wellman et al., 1988).
1.2.4 Serology
Serologic techniques, such as indirect fluorescent antibody 
(IFA) assays and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assays 
(ELISA), have long been a mainstay for confirming clini -
cal suspicion of a rickettsial disease due to the difficulties 
associated with isolating rickettsial organisms in culture 
and identifying some agents in peripheral blood using PCR 
(Carrade et al., 2009).
1.2.5 Immunohistochemistry/in situ 
hybridization/immunocytochemistry
It is feasible to show the presence of various rickettsial 
agents in tissue samples using immunohistochemistry 
(IHC) or in situ hybridization (ISH) techniques; however, 
these methods have typically been used for research rather 
than clinical diagnoses (Headley et al., 2009). A variation of 
this method known as avidin-biotin immunoperoxidase can 
be used to detect Rickettsia rickettsii in human skin biopsies 
(Dumler et al., 1990).
1.2.6 Molecular methods
Molecular diagnostic methods based on PCR detection of 
unique nucleic acid sequences can be used to confirm ac -
tive infection with Ehrlichia spp., Anaplasma spp., and 
Neorickettsia spp. Several commercial assays are also avail-
able to detect substances like Rickettsia spp. that are not 
frequently picked up by PCR, depending on the technology 
employed. However, antemortem specimens have shown 
that this method has inadequate sensitivity ( Sirigireddy 
et al., 2006).
1.2.7 Treatment
Doxycycline is thought to be the best treatment for rickett -
sial infections ( Nicholson et al., 2010 ). The ACVIM con -
sensus statement recommends doxycycline (10  mg/kg PO 
q24 h for 28  days) for the treatment of ehrlichiosis ( Neer 
et  al., 2002); a similar regimen is used for the treatment 
of clinical disease caused by Anaplasma phagocytophilum 
and R. rickettsii. Prompt doxycycline treatment is necessary 
when rickettsial etiology is suspected because  waiting too 
long to begin treatment can be fatal. The majority of dogs 
show clinical improvement within 1–2  days after starting 
antibiotic therapy; nevertheless, all but the worst cases did 
not respond to doxycycline treatment, indicating that there 
may be another underlying reason. A single course of treat-
ment may not be able to entirely eradicate an Ehrlichia or 
Anaplasma spp. infection, even though the clinical con -
dition improves, especially if it is only administered for 
a shorter amount of time (14  days as opposed to 28  days) 
(Schaefer et al., 2007 ). As a last resort, Ehrlichia spp. and 
Anaplasma spp. can also be treated with imidocarb and 
rifampin ( Schaefer et  al., 2008 ). Concomitant supportive 
care, such as blood transfusion, parenteral fluid administra-
tion, and/or prednisone, may be helpful in individuals who 
are more seriously affected, even though corticosteroids 
may trigger relapse and recrudescence in patients with sub-
clinical infections (Neer et al., 2002).
1.3 Chlamydial infections in dogs and cats
Chlamydia is one of the most prevalent zoonotic diseases 
that afflict animals and birds, according to Krawiec et al. 
(2015). Dogs and cats make up the majority of domestic 
animals that reside in densely populated areas and human 
dwellings ( Wieliczko and Płoneczka-Janeczko, 2010 ). 
After being exposed to the sickness, dogs and cats are still 
susceptible to getting it and can also transmit it to people 
(Holst et al., 2006).
1.3.1 Etiology
The Chlamydiales order and Chlamydiaceae family con -
tain only chlamydial organisms. In the genus Chlamydia, 
only two species, Chlamydia trachomatis and C. psittaci, 
have been identified ( Storz and Page, 1971 ). Chlamydiae 
are similar to bacteria in that they reproduce by binary fis -
sion and have a cell wall consisting of both RNA and DNA. 
In contrast to bacteria, it exclusively replicates inside host 
cells. As a result, the organisms are necessary intracellular 
parasites, similar to viruses. Since extracellular propagation 
has never been effective, the growth of the organism also 
requires living cells, such as those found in tissue culture, 
embryonated eggs, or lab animals ( Jones, 1974 ). The ap -
pearance of compact intracytoplasmic microcolonies that 
are stained with iodine can be used to identify the C. tra-
chomatis species. Sodium sulfadiazine stops embryonated 
eggs from growing. It is mostly a parasite of humans and 
is connected to urogenital infections, ocular illnesses, and 
neonatal pneumonia ( Shewen, 1980). One strain has also 
been linked to an endemic mouse pneumonitis ( Storz and 
Page, 1971). Chlamydia psittaci is recognized by dispersed 
microcolonies that do not stain with iodine and resist inhibi-
tion by sodium sulfadiazine. Along with a large number of 
wild mammals and more than 100 different domestic and

Mycoplasma, Rickettsia, and Chlamydia diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 33  495
wild bird species, the majority of domestic animals are sus-
ceptible to infection. Occasional human illness can result 
from contact with diseased animals (Storz and Page, 1971).
1.3.2 Signs and transmission
The natural transmission of chlamydial infections is consid-
ered to occur through fomites and close contact with other 
animals that are affected and their aerosols. It is uncertain 
if venereal transmission occurs in animals. According to 
O'Dair et al. (1994), pets frequently have an incubation pe-
riod of 3–5 days. Some symptoms include:
Canine chlamydia infection
Dog chlamydial infections have not been thoroughly explored; 
however, they have been connected to a number of ailments 
in dogs. Since chlamydial antibodies have been discovered 
in as many as 50% of clinically healthy dogs in serological 
tests, chlamydial infections do exist (Weber et al., 1977). Scott 
(1968) isolated chlamydiae from a dog with conjunctivitis 
and determined that they were the cause of superficial kera-
titis in German Shepherds (V oigt et al., 1966). An encepha-
litic condition in dogs was connected to the infection when 
chlamydiae were discovered in eggs, and antibodies were 
discovered in the serum of afflicted animals ( Giroud et  al., 
1954). Chlamydia taken from a dog with the same illness in-
duced cerebral and pulmonary problems after intracerebral 
injection of mice (Contini, 1956). Dog chlamydial infections 
have not been thoroughly explored; however, they have been 
connected to a number of ailments in dogs. Since chlamydial 
antibodies have been discovered in as many as 50% of clini-
cally healthy dogs in serological tests, chlamydial infections 
do exist (Weber et al., 1977). Scott (1968) isolated chlamydiae 
from a dog with conjunctivitis and determined that they were 
the cause of superficial keratitis in German Shepherds (V oigt 
et al., 1966). An encephalitic condition in dogs was connected 
to the infection when chlamydiae were discovered in eggs, 
and antibodies were discovered in the serum of afflicted ani-
mals (Giroud et al., 1954). Chlamydia taken from a dog with 
the same illness induced cerebral and pulmonary problems 
after intracerebral injection of mice (Contini, 1956).
Feline chlamydial infection
C. psittaci was first isolated by Baker from cats with pneumo-
nia (Baker, 1942). More recent investigations have identified 
the common conjunctivitis-causing bacteria ( Yerasimides, 
1960). A single mucoid or mucopurulent conjunctivitis may 
be present in these cats, and the contralateral eye may be -
come affected 5–7 days later. Chemosis, which occurs fre -
quently, has little effect on the cornea. The disease can be 
spread through contact with cats, most frequently via aerosol. 
When tetracycline ointment is given topically, the affected 
cats recover fast, but untreated cases will go away on their 
own. These untreated cats’ conjunctivitis frequently returns 
every 10–14  days. Some recovered cats still harbor latent 
infections, which infects catteries and spreads an enzootic 
disease. When kittens are delivered to unwell queens, their 
eyes may be open when they should not. They may also have 
acute conjunctivitis. These kittens’ conjunctival scrapings 
exhibit classic chlamydial inclusions, but searches for chla-
mydiae in the queens’ cervix have been unsuccessful (Cello, 
1971). Occasionally, these kittens’ necropsies reveal histo -
logical but subclinical pneumonia, and they may eventually 
deteriorate and pass away (Jubb et al., 2012). This condition 
was recently found in a litter of abandoned kittens ( Blanco 
et al., 1975). Recovering cats have a low level of resistance 
to infection (Cello, 1971). The egg-attenuated organism vac-
cine is indicated in high-risk situations since it has been dem-
onstrated to reduce the incidence and severity of the disease 
(Mitzel and Strating, 1977). It has been shown that the feline 
pathogen can spread to people; as a result, the owner of many 
infected cats developed follicular conjunctivitis ( Schachter 
et al., 1969). The feline organism is thought to have first de-
veloped while hunting birds or mice (Shewen, 1980). In this 
context, it’s critical to keep in mind that Baker first identified 
feline chlamydial pneumonia on farms while investigating 
calf pneumonia (Storz, 1971) as shown in Figs. 1 and 2.
FIG. 1 Acute conjunctivitis with chemosis in a cat infected with C. felis 
(Sykes, 2005).
FIG. 2 Chronic conjunctivitis with mucopurulent ocular discharge in a 
cat infected with C. felis (Sykes, 2005).

496 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
1.3.3 Diagnosis
Chlamydial infection must be distinguished from other in -
fectious and noninfectious causes of feline conjunctivitis. 
Since clinical symptoms cannot identify infections brought 
on by FCV, FHV-1, and C. felis, and mixed infections might 
happen, a microbiological assay is required for an accurate 
diagnosis. It is not recommended to use the Giemsa-stained 
conjunctival smear examination for chlamydial inclu -
sions as a reliable means of identifying feline chlamydial 
infection. Sometimes inclusions are inconspicuous, and 
frequently, they do not show up until the beginning of a 
disease (Wills, 1986). False-positive outcomes can occur if 
they are confused with either inclusion brought on by topi -
cal medications like Neosporin (commonly known as “blue 
bodies”) or melanin granules seen in the cytoplasm of con-
junctival cells (von Bomhard et al., 2003). Serum antibody 
titers measured by indirect immunofluorescence exhibited 
a significant connection with recent infection. Compared 
to 95% of cats with C. felis infection, 10% of uninfected 
cats have titers 32 ( Wills et al., 1988 ). Sadly, a diagnosis 
is typically required prior to a significant rise in antibody 
titer, and reliable serologic testing is hard to come by. There 
are numerous ELISA antigen kits available for the diagno -
sis of Chlamydia trachomatis infection. They differ in their 
specificities (80%–90%) and sensitivities (25%–80%) for 
chlamydial detection, particularly when compared to cell 
culture, which is thought to as the “gold standard” for chla-
mydial diagnosis (Pointon et al., 1991). These assays might 
be useful in cases where other, more accurate diagnostics 
are not accessible. After inoculating cell monolayers, in -
tracytoplasmic chlamydial inclusions are detected in cell 
culture by fluorescent antibodies. Specialized chlamydial 
transport media with the right antimicrobials are required to 
sustain chlamydial viability. You can buy these media from 
the lab. It is difficult, expensive, and time-consuming to iso-
late in cell culture. Issues with storage and delivery may 
affect the sensitivity of cell culture, and some samples may 
be dangerous for monolayers in cell culture. The sensitivity 
of culture may vary between laboratories depending on the 
equipment and level of technical understanding. Compared 
to traditional techniques like culture and ELISA, diagnos -
tic PCR tests are more expedient, less expensive, and fre -
quently more accurate. Human chlamydial infections are 
now frequently diagnosed with them, and C. felis tests are 
becoming more readily available. PCR has a high sensitiv -
ity and specificity when samples are obtained and preserved 
properly (Sykes et al., 1999 ). To collect samples from the 
conjunctival sac, use a cotton swab that has been moistened 
in saline. The biggest problem with PCR methods is false 
positives caused by contamination, which can occur both 
before and after samples are sent to the lab. Veterinarians 
taking samples for PCR should contact the lab for advice 
on sample collection and handling in order to minimize 
contamination that happens outside the lab. Additionally, 
they must guarantee that each extraction run in the lab in -
cludes both a positive control and a negative control. Broad-
spectrum chlamydial PCR, which is required to screen for 
non-C. felis  chlamydiae such Neochlamydia hartmannel -
lae, is currently only available in a small number of research 
institutes. More research is required on the connection be -
tween these species and disease before recommending 
widespread testing for these organisms in cats with con -
junctivitis (McDonald et al., 1998).
1.3.4 Treatment
Chlamydiae can be eliminated by tetracyclines, erythromy-
cin, rifampin, fluoroquinolones, and the azalide azithromy-
cin ( Isselbacher et  al., 1987 ). Contrary to popular belief, 
neither sulfonamides nor chloramphenicol are effective 
against C. felis. Doxycycline is the favored medication for 
treatment since it performs better than azithromycin, even 
when used daily ( Owen et  al., 2003 ). Systemic doxycy -
cline (5 mg/kg q12 h) is used to treat the C. felis infection 
for 3  weeks in study colonies ( Sykes et  al., 1999). There 
has been a considerable clinical improvement and organ -
ism elimination by day 2 after the start of therapy. Given 
that doxycycline has a long half-life, a once-daily dosage 
of 10  mg/kg is probably more effective and convenient. 
Another study discovered that systemic doxycycline treat -
ment was superior to twice-daily topical therapy using 1% 
chlortetracycline ointment ( Sparkes et  al., 1999 ). Recent 
research showing that chlamydial infections in cats are sys-
temic can be used to explain why topical treatment alone 
is unsuccessful. Occasionally, it took longer than 3  weeks 
of treatment to entirely get rid of spontaneous infections 
caused by C. felis. Every 6–8 h, systemic treatment should 
be used with topical tetracycline ointments, according to 
certain publications. A minimum of 6–8  weeks of therapy 
is also advised, especially for cats from catteries ( Greene, 
2006). Nevertheless, following the cessation of clinical in -
dications, medication should normally be continued for a 
further 2 weeks. As it is in patients with chlamydial arthri -
tis, it is likely that the organism will be more difficult to 
eradicate in persistent infections ( Leirisalo‐Repo, 1993 ). 
However, recurrent occurrences typically include numer -
ous cats and poor cooperation. All cats must receive the full 
course of antibiotic therapy, and proper quarantine and sani-
tation must be maintained. This could be hard to do if there 
is a problem with a large cat population. Since secondary 
bacterial infections have healed, concurrent viral infections 
like FHV-1 and FCV can also be a problem. Often, these 
infections respond quickly to antimicrobial therapy. If FCV 
infection is still a possibility, a bleach to detergent solution 
of 1:32 is suggested for general disinfection. When tetracy-
clines are administered in the last 2–3 weeks of pregnancy 
in queens or in the first few months of life in kittens, there

Mycoplasma, Rickettsia, and Chlamydia diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 33  497
is a chance that the kittens’ teeth will become permanently 
discolored. There is not much proof that doxycycline harms 
cats in these ways, and it has a lesser affinity for binding 
calcium than other tetracyclines. To lower the danger of 
esophagitis brought on by doxycycline, a syringe should be 
used to provide a doxycycline suspension or a water bolus 
after the consumption of pills. Despite the fact that penicil-
lin is only supposed to be inhibitory, a 4-week course of 
amoxicillin-clavulanic acid totally eradicates C. felis  in 
experimentally infected cats, and there is no recurrence 
6 months after the conclusion of treatment. This might take 
the place of tetracyclines for the effective treatment of chla-
mydiosis in young kittens (Sturgess et al., 2001).
2 Conclusion
Animals require care that is specific to their requirements. 
Opportunistic agents enter animal barriers when immu -
nological state, a critical component, declines. Ticks and 
other vectors are also significant in the spread of several 
illnesses among pets. The majority of these illnesses may 
be found in the blood of animals that seem healthy, which is 
something veterinarians should be aware of. It is crucial to 
prevent these people from spreading iatrogenic infections. 
In instance, prior to giving blood, animals that will serve 
as donors should be checked for any relevant illnesses and 
shown to be seronegative or PCR negative (depending on 
the screened pathogen).

498 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats

Mycoplasma, Rickettsia, and Chlamydia diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 33  499

501

Chapter 34
Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats
Abbreviations
CFT compliment fixation test
CSF cerebrospinal fluid
ELISA enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay
ERIC  enterobacterial repetitive intergenic 
consensus
FISH fluorescence in situ hybridization
FT-IR  Fourier-transform infrared 
spectroscopy
HAIT hemagglutination inhibition test
IFA indirect fluorescence assay
IFAT  Immunofluorescence antibody 
technique
MALDI-TOF-MS  matrix-assisted laser desorption/
ionization time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry
MLEE multilocus enzyme electrophoresis
MLVA  multiloci amplification of variable 
number tandem repetitive analysis
PCR polymerase chain reaction
PFGE pulse-field gel electrophoresis
1 Introduction
Dogs and cats suffer from an array of diseases caused by 
pathogenic bacterial organisms. Some of these bacteria are 
found in the gastrointestinal tracts as normal inhabitants 
commonly the Enterobacteriaceae, while some are found 
in the habitat comprising water bodies ambient air or veg -
etation. The earlier are mostly Gram-negative, causing gas-
trointestinal symptoms via production of endotoxins while 
the later are mostly Gram-positive that produce endotoxins 
with potential integumentary system symptoms. These bac-
teria spread via air, water, contact, feco-oral or by invasion 
of resident bacteria in the presence of stress. Owing to the 
fact that dogs and cats are close to humans; many of these 
bacterial diseases are zoonotic in nature, spreading from the 
pets to the humans, humans to the pets or in both directions. 
A wide range of antibiotics are available for the treatment of 
these diseases either single therapy or combination therapy 
with recorded good recovery rates as some show some lev-
els of resistance which may arise from wrong regimentation 
or plasmid-related.
2 Salmonellosis
2.1 Cause
Salmonella enterica  subspecies; S. enterica , S. galli -
nae, S. arizonae , S. indica , S. houtenae , and S. salamae 
(Guibourdenche et al., 2010).
2.2 Hosts
Dogs, cats, other vertebrates, birds and insects ( Bagcigil 
et al., 2007).
2.3 Spread
Apparently, healthy pets intermittently shed organisms in 
feces; contaminating feed and water (Pépin et al., 2005).
2.4 Clinical signs
Acute cases manifest 3–5  days post exposure with fever, 
malaise, lethargy, anorexia, abdominal pain and enteritis 
characterized by watery, mucoid or bloody diarrhea (Morse 
and Duncan, 1975).
2.5 Pathology
Gross lesions include mesenteric lymphadenopathy, epithe-
lial sloughing of ileum, caecum and colon.
Microscopic lesions include mesenteric lymphadenitis, 
shortened villi, neutrophilic infiltration of lamina propria, 
thrombosis of intestinal capillaries and hemorrhages (Tauni 
and Österlund, 2000).

502 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
2.6 Diagnosis
Clinical signs ( Stiver et  al., 2003 ), culture and isolation 
and sero/molecular diagnosis like ELISA, PCR and IFAT 
(Oliveira et al., 2003).
2.7 Treatment
Ampicillin, enrofloxacin ( Marks et al., 2002 ), oxytetracy-
cline, gentamicin, amoxicillin-clavulanic acid, ciprofloxa -
cin, neomycin and chloramphenicol (Li et al., 2012).
2.8 Prevention
Eliminating infection source by employing strict biosecu -
rity measures and animal quarantine (Lefebvre et al., 2008).
3 Colibacillosis
3.1 Cause
Escherichia coli (Sancak et al., 2004) including enterotoxi-
genic E. coli (ETEC); enteropathogenic E. coli (EPEC) and 
verocytotoxic E. coli (Hammermueller et al., 1995).
3.2 Hosts
Dog, cat and most warm-blooded animals ( Sancak et  al., 
2004).
3.3 Spread
Fecal-oral route ( Clooten et  al., 2008 ; McFarland, 2006 ; 
Fig. 1).
3.4 Pathogenesis
Oral, intrauterine or ascending genital inoculation is fol -
lowed by proliferation and subsequent colonization of gas -
trointestinal, reproductive or urinary tract (Beutin, 1999).
3.5 Clinical signs
Intestinal forms, usually termed granulomatous colitis pres-
ent marked weight loss, anorexia, watery and nonbloody 
diarrhea in kittens or hematochezia (Beutin, 1999).
Extraintestinal forms present septicemia, otitis externa 
(Baba and Fukata, 1981), cholecystitis, pyelonephritis, cys-
titis and pyometra (Wadås et al., 1996; Figs. 2 and 3).
3.6 Pathology
Macroscopic lesions include thickened colon wall, colonic 
and jejunal lymphadenomegaly, hemorrhages and narrow -
ing of large intestinal lumens (Baba and Fukata, 1981).
Microscopically, periodic acid Schiff positive macro -
phages infiltrating intestinal mucosa, mucosal ulcerations 
and necrosis of goblet cells (Wadås et al., 1996).
3.7 Diagnosis
Clinical signs, bacterial culture and isolation, patho -
logical lesions, sero/molecular diagnosis such as FISH 
E. coli 
shedding
host
Faeco-oral 
spread
oro-genito-
utero 
inoculation
organism 
proliferation
organ 
colonization
tissue 
damage
clinical 
manifestation
FIG.  1 Escherichia coli  spread, pathogenesis, pathology and clinical 
manifestation.
FIG.  2 Closed cervix pyometra noticed 4  days postpartum in a queen 
before excision.

Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 34  503
(Van Kruiningen et al., 1965), PCR (Hammermueller et al., 
1995), antigen K-serotyping (Yoshida et al., 2019).
3.8 Differential diagnosis
Gastrointestinal foreign body.
Canine parvovirus (Wadås et al., 1996).
3.9 Treatment
Enrofloxacin at 10  mg/kg q24h P·O for 8  weeks ( Craven 
et al., 2010 ), trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole combination, 
ampicillin or oxytetracycline (Moyaert et al., 2017).
3.10 Prevention
Strict hygiene such as hand washing and preventing pet 
food contamination (Kataoka et al., 2010).
4 Klebsiellosis
4.1 Cause
Klebsiella species (Wareth and Neubauer, 2021).
4.2 Hosts
Dogs, cats, humans and many mammals ( Fecteau et  al., 
1997; Wilson and Madigan, 1989).
4.3 Spread
From fecal contamination of soil, water and vegetation 
(Guo et al., 2016).
4.4 Clinical signs
Enteritis accompanied by vomiting, watery, mucoid or 
bloody diarrhea and hematochezia ( Roberts et  al., 2000 ). 
Others include wound infection, urinary tract infection, cir-
culatory system infections and pneumonia ( Sedighi et al., 
2020).
4.5 Pathology
Gross signs include thickened and hemorrhagic small in -
testinal serosae, ecchymotic hemorrhages on epicardium, 
generalized lymphadenopathy, distended gall bladder, con-
gested lungs, liver and kidneys (Roberts et al., 2000).
Microscopically, extensive necrotic areas around small 
intestinal mucosa, disseminated intravascular coagulation 
in intestinal capillaries, necrosis of glandular and intestinal 
crypt cells (Roberts et al., 2000).
4.6 Diagnosis
Clinical signs (Roberts et al., 2000 ), bacterial culture ( Das 
et  al., 2020) and molecular diagnosis such as ERIC-PCR 
(Seifi et al., 2016).
Differential diagnoses
– Salmonellosis.
– Parvovirus enteritis (Seifi et al., 2016).
4.7 Treatment
Gentamicin, enrofloxacin, chloramphenicol or combination 
of ceftriaxone-sulbactam (Das et al., 2020).
5 Yersiniosis
5.1 Cause
Yersinia species, commonly Y. pestis, Y. pseudotuberculo-
sis, and Y. enterocolitica (Stamm et al., 2013).
5.2 Hosts
Dogs, cats and many mammals (Rosner et al., 2010).
5.3 Spread
Sporadic outbreaks through food-borne route (Fredriksson-
Ahomaa et al., 2006) or interaction with infected dogs/cats 
(Fenwick et al., 1994; Fig. 4).
FIG. 3 Consider the pus-filled uterine horns with engorged blood vessels.

504 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
5.4 Pathogenesis
Yersinia organism on ingestion invades gastrointestinal 
tracts and binds to B1 integrins on host cells ( Hu et  al., 
2010) facilitated by enteric acidic conditions and tempera -
ture optimal for expressing chromosomal encoded protein 
“invasion” (Pepe and Miller, 1993).
5.5 Clinical signs
Yersiniosis exhibits three clinical forms; the bubonic, sep -
ticemic and pneumonic plaque which are all rare in dogs 
(Schaffer et al., 2020 ) but more common in cats presented 
with dyspnea and hemoptysis (Gage et al., 2000), acute gas-
troenteritis with bloody diarrhea, fever, mesenteric lymph -
adenopathy (Vlachaki et al., 2007), depression, dehydration 
and death within few days (Philbey et al., 1991).
5.6 Pathological findings
Grossly, enteric forms show fluid-filled small intestines 
and colon which are having congested and roughened mu -
cosae (Slee and Button, 1990 ); mesenteric lymphadenopa-
thy characterized by enlargement, congestion and edema 
(Philbey et al., 1991).
Septicemic show bacteremia with multiple organ in -
flammation and necrosis while pneumonic with diffuse 
necrotizing pneumonia of lower respiratory tract ( Stenseth 
et al., 2008 ). Bubonic show multicentric necrosupporative 
lymphadenitis with several bacterial colonies, vasculitis, 
thrombosis, hemorrhages, necrotic foci and roughened 
hepatic surfaces ( Brown and Davis, 1989 ), thick fibrinous 
exudates on lungs, petechial hemorrhages and epicardial 
oedema resulting to bleeding into intestinal tract ( Bin-Kun 
et al., 1994).
5.7 Diagnosis
Clinical signs, bacterial culture, pathological findings 
(Aleksić et  al., 1991 ) and sero-molecular diagnosis like 
MALDI-TOF-MS, confirmation using real-time PCR 
(Schaffer et  al., 2020 ), PFGE or FT-IR ( Fredriksson-
Ahomaa et al., 2006).
5.8 Treatment
Ampicillin/sulbactam sodium, enrofloxacin and intrave -
nous fluids such as lactated Ringer’s solution at 50 mg/kg 
IV Q8hourly, 10 mg/kg IV Q24 hour and 80 mL/kg/day ini-
tially, maintenance at 60 mL/kg/day respectively ( Schaffer 
et al., 2020).
5.9 Differential diagnoses
Bacterial hepatitis
Leptospirosis (Schaffer et al., 2020).
5.10 Prevention
Minimize dog-cat-human contact and among pets 
(European Food Safety Authority and European Centre for 
Disease Prevention and Control, 2012) and vaccination with 
“Yersiniavac” (Gill, 1996).
6 Bartonellosis
6.1 Cause
Bartonella henselae (Deng et al., 2012).
6.2 Hosts
Cats are primary reservoir hosts, humans (Jaffe et al., 2018), 
dogs and several mammals (Olarte et al., 2012).
6.3 Spread
Blood-sucking arthropods; lice, biting flies, fleas and ticks 
ingest the intraerythrocytic bacteria from blood stream and 
inoculate it to either a primary reservoir or accidental hosts 
(Regier et al., 2016; Fig. 5).
6.4 Pathogenesis
Upon inoculation, the bacteria colonize organs such as 
spleen, bone marrow, kidneys, endothelial cells ( Da Silva 
et al., 2017 ), erythrocytes and CD34 + progenitors ( Brook 
Yersinia
infection
bubonic
lympha
denopat
hy
septicae
mic
gastroe
nteritis fever depressi
on
dehydra
tion
Pneumo
nic
haemop
tysis dyspnoea
FIG. 4 Yersiniosis spread pattern.

Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 34  505
et  al., 2017 ) followed by recurring bacteremia ( Maeno 
et al., 1999) and vascular damage (Dehio, 2005).
6.5 Clinical signs
Though commonly self-limiting, subclinical bacteremia, 
encephalitis, fever, lymphadenomegaly, ocular disease 
(Uveitis and neuroretinitis), endo and myocarditis and skin 
inflammation (Mazur-Melewska et al., 2015).
6.6 Pathology
Pulmonary nodules, lymphadenopathy, kidney enlargement 
and splenomegaly (Morales et al., 2007).
Histological includes dermatitis, panniculitis, pyogran -
ulomatous lymphadenitis, endocarditis, hepatitis, granu -
lomatous rhinitis ( Cross et  al., 2008 ), polyarthritis and 
meningitis (Kordick et al., 1999).
6.7 Diagnosis
Clinical signs, pathological lesions, bacterial culture in 
BAPGM-PCR (Oteo et al., 2017), sero/molecular like PCR 
(Chomel et al., 2006), western immunoblot, FISH, IFA and 
ELISA (Varanat et al., 2009).
6.8 Treatment
Doxycycline-pradofloxacin at 5  mg/kg PO 12  h for 
4–5  weeks in cats or doxycycline alone at 5  mg/kg 12 
hourly followed by second regimen in 5–7  days in dogs 
(Breitschwerdt, 2017).
6.9 Prevention
Vector control using acaricidal collars, spray-on and spot-
on (Lappin et al., 2013).
7 Tularaemia
7.1 Cause
Francisella tularensis (Feldman et al., 2003).
7.2 Hosts
Cats (Staples et al., 2006), dogs (Meinkoth et al., 2004) and 
several mammals (Morner and Mattsson, 1983). Ticks serve 
as reservoir hosts (Kwit et al., 2019).
7.3 Spread
Dogs and cats acquire infection via arthropod bites, inges -
tion, direct contact with infected tissues or mechanical trans-
mission by deer-flies and mosquitoes (Cherry et al., 2019).
7.4 Pathogenesis
Upon entrance of organism via arthropod bite (Klock et al., 
1973) or direct contact with infected tissues; it proliferates 
arthropod vector
primary blood meal 
(From carrier)
salivary gland 
invasion
secondary blood 
meal (Primary 
reservoir/Accidental 
host)
bacteraemia
FIG. 5 Spread of Bartonella.

506 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
within macrophages and hematogenously spread through -
out the body ( Bossi et al., 2004 ), causing massive damage 
to capillary endothelial cells, thrombosis in lungs, spleen, 
liver, lymph nodes and bone marrow (Feldman et al., 2003).
7.5 Clinical signs
Cat infections are usually nonclinical; clinical manifesta -
tions include fever, lymphadenopathy, anorexia, listless -
ness, dehydration, pneumonia, icterus, draining abscess and 
oro-lingual ulcerations (Woods et al., 1998).
Dogs present acute pyrexia, anorexia, lymphadenopa -
thy, necrotizing fasciitis ( Gustafson and DeBowes, 1996 ), 
mucopurulent oculonasal discharges and dermal pustules 
(Damon and Johnson, 1944).
7.6 Pathology
Gross lesions include splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, lymph-
adenoma in dogs and cats (Rhyan et al., 1990).
Histological lesions include several small, grayish, yel -
low or white necrotic foci in spleen, lungs and liver, multi -
focal fibrin necrotic pneumonia (Donnelly and Behr, 2000) 
and Peyer’s patches involvement (Rhyan et al., 1990).
7.7 Diagnosis
Clinical signs, postmortem findings (Gustafson and DeBowes, 
1996), bacterial culture and PCR (Ikäheimo et al., 2000).
7.8 Treatment
Gentamicin at 6.6 mg/kg IM/IV/SC q24h or divided q12h 
or 8 h.
Doxycycline at 5 mg/kg PO q24 to 12 h.
Chloramphenicol at 50  mg/kg PO/IM q12h in cats or 
loading dose of 100 mg/kg followed by 50 mg/kg PO/IM 
q8h maintenance in dogs (Feldman et al., 2003).
7.9 Prevention
Acaricidal use, minimizing direct contact with hunting pets 
and prompt veterinarian care for supposedly sick pets (Kwit 
et al., 2019).
8 Campylobacteriosis
8.1 Cause
Campylobacter jejuni and C. coli (Corry and Atabay, 2001).
8.2 Hosts
Dogs, cats, wild birds, pigs, cattle and sheep ( Simpson 
et al., 1981; Stern et al., 1992).
8.3 Spread
Asymptomatic animals, human sewage, wild birds, manure 
run-offs from feces in animal farms contaminate surface 
water and shallow wells (Olson et al., 2008).
8.4 Pathogenesis
Induced neutrophilic intestinal inflammation by activation 
of NF-KB which stimulate production of neutrophil che -
mokine IL-8 and migration of neutrophils across epithelia 
through chemotactic n-formyl peptides and 12-LOX metab-
olites production that cause enteritis (Murphy et al., 2011).
8.5 Clinical signs
Enteritis in puppies and kittens seen as loose, watery, mu -
coid or bloody diarrhea, intermittent vomiting, anorexia and 
fever (Murphy et al., 2011).
8.6 Pathology
Gross and histological changes such as mucosal fibrosis, 
epithelial injury, shortened villi, crypt dilatation, lacteal 
dilatation, neutrophilic inflammation, lymphangiectasia, 
mucosal atrophy and eosinophilic inflammation ( Maunder 
et al., 2016).
8.7 Diagnosis
Clinical signs, bacterial culture, pathological findings 
(Maunder et  al., 2016 ) and molecular diagnosis such as 
PCR (Abu-Halaweh et al., 2005).
8.8 Treatment
Macrolides such as azithromycin, erythromycin or fluoro -
quinolones are drugs of choice (Marks et al., 2002).
9 Listeriosis
9.1 Cause
Listeria monocytogenes  and L. ivanovii  ( Maurice Bilung 
et al., 2018).
9.2 Hosts
Dogs, cats, sheep, pigs, horses, camels, birds, humans, cat -
tle and buffalo (Sizonenko et al., 2019).
9.3 Spread
Ingestion of food and water contaminated with feces, or 
other secretions (Brugère-Picoux, 2008).

Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 34  507
9.4 Pathogenesis
Inoculation followed by migration to target organ, recep -
tors attachment, invasion into epithelia aided by phagocytic 
vacuole, vacuole escape (Dhama et al., 2015) and activation 
of virulence factors such as hemolysin and bile salt hydro -
lase that help in adhesion, intracellular multiplication and 
pathogenicity (Osanai et al., 2013; Vera et al., 2013; Fig. 6).
9.5 Clinical signs
Diarrhea, vomiting, fever, laborious breathing, encephali -
tis seen as ataxia, convulsions, torticollis, muscle pain and 
death (Goulet et al., 2013), abortion, mastitis, repeat bread-
ing, endometritis, skin ulcerations, dermatitis and tonsilitis 
(Läikkö et al., 2004; Figs. 7–9).
9.6 Pathology
Grossly abscess and softening of medulla, brainstem discol-
oration (Rocha et al., 2013 ), splenomegaly, hepatomegaly, 
hemorrhages in liver and spleen (Dhama et al., 2015).
Histological lesions include spinal myelitis, perivascu -
lar lymphocytic cuffing, micro-abscesses on brainstem, vas-
culitis, oedema (Rocha et al., 2013), multifocal necrosis in 
liver and spleen (Dhama et al., 2015).
9.7 Diagnosis
Culture, isolation and identification of bacteria ( Brugère-
Picoux, 2008), pathological findings ( Rocha et al., 2013 ), 
PCR, agglutination test, CFT, HAIT and ELISA ( Benetti 
et al., 2013; Dhama et al., 2014).
listerialisteria
inocula/g415oninocula/g415on
migra/g415onmigra/g415on toto
targettarget organorgan
receptorreceptor
a/g425achmen ta/g425achmen t
vacuolevacuole
forma/g415onforma/g415on
epithelialepithelial
invasioninvasion
vacuolevacuolee scapeescape
virulencevirulencef actorsfactors
ac/g415va/g415onac/g415va/g415on
clinicalclinical
manifesta/g415onsmanifesta/g415ons
FIG. 6 Listeria pathogenesis.

508 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
FIG. 7 A queen undergoing treatment for presenting symptoms of bilat-
eral blindness, head tilting and staggering gait aborted fetus, serum cal -
cium level within normal range.
FIG. 8 Mastitis with cheesy blood-tinged material squeezed out of the tit 
in a non-lactating queen.
FIG. 9 Aforementioned aborted cat with characteristic torticollis.
FIG.  10 Severe suppurative lymphadenitis in a bronchial lymph node 
(arrow) (Eroksuz et al., 2016).

Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 34  509
Anton test by dropping infected material in rabbit’s con-
junctiva to produce conjunctivitis or keratoconjunctivitis 
within 24–36 h (Brugère-Picoux, 2008).
9.8 Treatment
β-Lactam with or without trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole, 
erythromycin, vancomycin or fluoroquinolones ( Temple 
and Nahata, 2000).
9.9 Prevention
Implementation of good management and biosecurity 
(Brugère-Picoux, 2008).
10 Nocardiosis
10.1 Cause
Nocardia farcinica and N. nova of N. asteroides complex 
(Kiska et al., 2002).
10.2 Hosts
Dogs (Eroksuz et al., 2016), cats, birds and domestic/wild/
zoo mammals (Leger et al., 2009).
10.3 Spread
Inhalation, ingestion or subcutaneous transmission from 
soil, water or plant of spore-like cell fragments ( Brown-
Elliott et al., 2006; Chedid et al., 2007).
10.4 Pathogenesis
Following ingestion or secondary penetrating injury 
(Eroksuz et al., 2016), it spread to adjacent tissues via lym-
phatics causing sloughing and devitalization, necrosis and 
ischemia (Soto et al., 2014).
10.5 Clinical signs
Fever, jaundice, uveitis, keratitis, sulfur-like granules in 
wound exudates (Marks et al., 2002), vertebral osteomyelitis 
(Soto et al., 2014), pneumonia, pyothorax (Bali et al., 2000), 
peritonitis (Tilgner and Anstey, 1996), dermatitis, cellulitis 
and fistulous draining tracts (Ramos-Vara et al., 2007).
10.6 Pathology
Multifocal coalescing pyogranulomatous abscess in lungs, 
liver, heart, spleen, kidneys, pulmonary lymph nodes with 
thickened and opaque meninges, petechial hemorrhages 
in epicardium and diaphragmatic surfaces of heart grossly 
(Soto et al., 2014; Figs. 10–13).
Microscopic findings include lymphoplasmacytic and 
neutrophilic inflammatory reactions in Virchow-Robin 
spaces, meningitis, granulomas with necrotic centers, sinu-
soidal hepatitis, Kupffer cells activation and cloudy swell -
ing in the liver (Eroksuz et al., 2016).
FIG.  11  Coronal section of left frontal lobe showing multifocal-  
coalescing abscesses (arrows) (Eroksuz et al., 2016).
FIG. 12 Multifocal, pyogranulomatous nephritis (arrow) (Eroksuz et al., 
2016).

510 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
10.7 Differential diagnosis
Subcutaneous form should be differentiated from 
Rhodococcosis, Corynobacteriosis, Actinomycosis, 
Dermatophilosis (Malik et al., 2004 ) and canine distemper 
(Eroksuz et al., 2016).
10.8 Diagnosis
Clinical signs, pathological findings, molecular diagnosis 
such as PCR ( Eroksuz et al., 2016 ), bacterial culture aug -
mented with biochemical tests (Malik, 2007).
10.9 Treatment
Amoxicillin and clarithromycin at 20 and 62.5–125 mg/kg 
BID.
Doxycycline at 5 mg/kg BID in cats.
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole at 15–40  mg/kg BID 
(Malik, 2007).
Ampicillin-erythromycin with or without trimethoprim-
sulfamethoxazole (Luque et al., 2002).
11 Staphylococcal infections
11.1 Cause
Staphylococcus species (Zakošek Pipan et al., 2019).
11.2 Hosts
Dogs, cats and several mammals (Wertheim et al., 2005).
11.3 Spread
Dam’s milk in puppies ( Zakošek Pipan et al., 2019 ), skin-
to-skin contact, aerosols from sneezing, coughing and sa -
liva (Malik et al., 2004).
11.4 Pathogenesis
The bacteria upon invasion of inner tissues ( Malik et  al., 
2004) employ its different virulence markers in form of en-
zymes or other molecules to elicit damages that result to 
clinical manifestations (Tomasello et al., 2021).
11.5 Clinical signs
Otitis, pyoderma, urinary tract infections, toxic shock syn -
drome/necrotizing fasciitis, arthritis, osteomyelitis, perito -
nitis, ocular infection, septicemia ( Tomasello et al., 2021), 
superficial dermatitis, bacterial folliculitis, follicular pap -
ules/pustules (Bannoehr and Guardabassi, 2012 ), and con-
junctivitis (Sganga et al., 2020; Figs. 14 and 15).
11.6 Pathology
Cutaneous gross findings of pyogenic granulomatous called 
bacterial pseudomycetoma, distended abdomen, catarrhal 
gastroenteritis, lymphadenopathy, congested liver, spleen, 
pancreas and meninges (Zakošek Pipan et al., 2019).
Histological lesions include eosinophilic Splendore-
Hoeppli material surrounding bacterial colonies, nodular 
panniculitis ( Sah et  al., 2018 ), acute interstitial pneumo -
nia and myocardial necrosis with mineralization ( Zakošek 
Pipan et al., 2019; Figs. 16 and 17).
11.7 Diagnosis
Clinical signs (Carroll et al., 2021), bacterial culture (Malik 
et  al., 2004 ), and postmortem/biopsy findings ( Turner, 
2021).
11.8 Treatment
Amoxicillin and clavulanic acid followed by clindamycin 
or cephalexin, topical fusidic acid, chlorhexidine and mi -
conazole shampoo and phage therapy (Malik et al., 2004).
11.9 Prevention
Live-attenuated/inactivated vaccines (bacterins) against 
pyoderma (Carroll et al., 2021).
12 Streptococcal infections
12.1 Cause
Streptococcus species (Britton and Davies, 2010).
FIG. 13 Multifocal, coalescing abscesses in the cerebral cortex (H&E) 
(Eroksuz et al., 2016).

Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 34  511
12.2 Hosts
Dogs, cats, poultry and several marine/terrestrial mammals 
(Bannister et al., 1985).
12.3 Spread
Through contaminated milk ( Schäfer‐Somi et  al., 2003 ), 
in-utero infection, during parturition ( Bjurström, 1993 ), 
 skin-to-skin contact, bite wounds ( Loubinoux et al., 1997 ) 
and indirect contact (Weese et al., 2009).
12.4 Pathogenesis
The hyperproduction of proinflammatory cytokines leads 
to hyperinflammatory response which results to increased 
FIG. 14 Left: Yellowish diarrhea with a few strings of blood visible in the feces of the puppy. Slightly blue discoloration is visible on the abdominal skin 
and foot of the puppy. Right: Pustules around the muzzle in a one-day-old puppy (Zakošek Pipan et al., 2019).
FIG. 15 Purulent oculonasal discharges due to Staphilococcus species 
infection in a rescued cat.
FIG. 16 Thoracic and abdominal cavity of the deceased puppy. The nec-
ropsy revealed catarrhal gastroenteritis, congestion of the liver and white 
yellow, slightly opaque exudate in the thoracic cavity ( Zakošek Pipan 
et al., 2019).

512 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
vascular permeability, vasodilation, increased coagulation 
and migration of inflammatory cells to site of infection 
(Schäfer‐Somi et al., 2003).
12.5 Clinical signs
Purulent nasal discharges, cough, sinusitis, dyspnea, pneu -
monia, abscesses, toxic shock syndrome, meningitis, poly -
arthritis and osteomyelitis in cats (Blum et al., 2010).
Abortion, septicemia, dermatitis, pneumonia, endocar -
ditis, necrotizing fasciitis, keratitis, lower urinary tract in -
fections, arthritis, cholangitis and meningoencephalitis in 
dogs (Pesavento et al., 2008; Figs. 18–21).
12.6 Pathology
Suppurative bronchoalveolar pneumonia, pleuritis, pyo -
granulomatous meningoencephalitis, necrosupporative  
peritonitis in cats ( Blum et  al., 2010 ). Encephalitis, 
 endocarditis with thickened and mottled dark red valves, 
pulmonary consolidation, dark red and rubbery lungs 
and dermal cavitations are gross findings in dogs ( Lamm 
et al., 2010 ).
Histological lesions include diffuse mixed neutro -
philic, histiocytic and lymphocytic infiltrations, valvular 
expansions with fibrin, cellular debris and neutrophils 
(Blum et al., 2010 ). Neutrophils mixed with fibrin, mac -
rophages, lymphocytes and plasma cells expanding me -
ninges and Robin-Virchow space ( Irwin and Parry, 1999 ) 
and distended vascular lumina in multiple organs ( Lamm 
et al., 2010).
12.7 Diagnosis
Clinical signs, postmortem findings, bacterial culture 
(Blum et  al., 2010 ) and DNA extraction using PCR ( Oh 
et al., 2015).
12.8 Treatment
Trimethoprim-sulfamethoxazole combination for weeks is 
drug of choice for eradication (Byun et al., 2009).
12.9 Prevention
Sick pets should be isolated and veterinarian to wear protec-
tive clothing prior to handling (Weese et al., 2009).
FIG. 17 Left: Histology picture of lungs: Acute interstitial pneumonia. Scale bar, 100 μm. Right: Histology picture of myocardium: Myocardial necrosis 
(arrowheads) and mineralization (arrows) of the left ventricle. Scale bar, 100 μm (Zakošek Pipan et al., 2019).
FIG. 18 Massive abscess around the axillar covering left lateral chest in 
a rescued street cat due to Streptococcus species infection.

Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 34  513
13 Tetanus
13.1 Cause
Tetanospasmin produced by Clostridium tetani  ( Popoff, 
2020).
13.2 Hosts
Most animal species including dogs and cats ( Smith et al., 
1975).
13.3 Spread
Wound contamination with tetani spores from soil 
(Bytchenko, 1981).
13.4 Pathogenesis
Spores enter wound and vegetate under anaerobic condi -
tions to produce potent neurotoxin tetanospasmin ( Popoff, 
2020). This enters peripheral nerves at infection site, spinal 
cord neuronal cell bodies, brainstem and later across syn -
apse to bind irreversibly to interneurons meant to inhibit 
recurrent firing of motor neurons as well as contraction of 
FIG. 19 Bite-wound immediately after shaving and dressing under an -
esthesia with hydrogen peroxide. Synolux (Amoxi-clav), vitamin C and 
ketoprofen were injected (Strep).
FIG. 20 Same wound 4 days after treatment initiation.
FIG. 21 Bite sites after 3 weeks.

514 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
flexor and extensor muscles leading to sustained spasm 
(Sanford, 1995; Figs. 22 and 23).
13.5 Clinical signs
Localized spastic paralysis seen as trismus, stiff limbs 
(Burkitt et al., 2007) or generalized presented as mild body 
spasm, erect ears, wrinkled forehead and hyperthermia after 
incubation of 5–10 days (Sprott, 2008).
13.6 Differentials
Polymyositis, strychnine intoxication, spinal trauma, hypo-
calcemia and meningoencephalitis (Sprott, 2008).
13.7 Diagnosis
Clinical signs with wound, electromyography ( De Risio 
et  al., 2006 ), serum TeNT detection, ELISA and PCR 
(Huang et al., 2013).
13.8 Prevention
Two shots of formaldehyde inactivated TeNT immunization 
at 3–4 weeks interval (Van Galen et al., 2017).
13.9 Treatment
Intravenous TAT, penicillin G at 25  mg/kg for 7  days, 
 diazepam-acepromazine/chlorpromazine-phenobarbital 
and fluid therapy (Sprott, 2008).
14 Pasteurellosis
14.1 Cause
Pasteurella multocida (Klein and Cunha, 1997).
14.2 Hosts
Cats, dogs and many mammals (Morris and McAllister, 1992).
14.3 Spread
Through bite wounds.
14.4 Clinical signs
Fever, headache, nuchal rigidity, nausea and meningitis 
with altered level of consciousness (Green et al., 2002).
14.5 Diagnosis
Clinical signs, organism isolation and PCR ( Dousse et al., 
2008).
14.6 Treatment
Penicillins or third-generation cephalosporins. 
Chloramphenicol is recommended if beta-lactam antibiotic 
allergy exists (Tun et al., 2018).
14.7 Prevention
Proper pet oral, feed and kennel hygiene to avoid inocula -
tion (Green et al., 2002).
15 Clostridium perfringens infection
15.1 Cause
Clostridium perfringens (Kokai-Kun et al., 1994).
15.2 Hosts
Dogs (Argenti et al., 1987 ), cats ( Marks et al., 2002 ) and 
several mammals (Songer and Meer, 1996).
15.3 Spread
Ingesting food contaminated with bacterial spores ( Bartlett 
et al., 1972) or disruption of intestinal flora causing sporula-
tion (Marks et al., 2002).
soil-borne spore
wound inocula/g415on
spore vegeta/g415on
tetanospasmin
produc/g415on
peripheraln erve
entry
synapsec rossinga nd
interneuroneb inding
GABA/glycine release
inhibi/g415on
muscle spasms
FIG. 22 Tetanus pathogenesis.

Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 34  515
15.4 Clinical signs
Diarrhea which may be mild self-limiting or progressing 
to acute hemorrhagic with intestinal mucosa inflammation 
(Cave et al., 2002) and fever (Kather et al., 2006).
15.5 Diagnosis
Clinical signs, ELISA, PCR ( Marks et al., 2002 ) and fecal 
endospores Gram-staining (Marks et al., 1999).
15.6 Treatment
Ampicillin, erythromycin, metronidazole and tetracycline 
(Kather et al., 2006).
16 Clostridium difficile infection
16.1 Cause
Clostridium difficile (Marks et al., 2002).
16.2 Hosts
Cats, dogs and several species mostly young (Arroyo et al., 
2004).
16.3 Spread
Ingestion of spores (Marks et al., 2002).
FIG. 23 Structure of tetanus toxin (TeNT) and schematic representation of its mode of action. H C = receptor-binding domain; H N = translocation do-
main; LC = light chain or enzymatic domain containing the enzymatic site. TeNT is transported from contaminated wound to the central nervous system 
by retrograde axonal transport through motor neurons and possibly sensory neurons. In the spinal cord and brain, TeNT targets inhibitory interneurons 
blocking the release of glycine and GABA. This results in muscular hyperactivity subsequent to stimuli (e.g., touch, light, noise, temperature) as a result 
of the absence of inhibitory control. Tetanus (Popoff, 2020).

516 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
16.4 Pathogenesis
Proliferation of toxin-producing strains in the GIT to pro -
duce toxin A, B and binary CD that causes C. diffile-induced 
diarrhea (Lefebvre et al., 2006 ) due to damaged intestinal 
epithelial cells (Nale et al., 2012).
16.5 Clinical signs
Subclinical carrier to fatal acute hemorrhagic diarrheal syn-
drome of small and large intestinal origin (Cave et al., 2002).
16.6 Diagnosis
Clinical signs ( Cave et  al., 2002 ), fecal toxin detection, 
culture and isolation, ELISA and real-time PCR ( Lefebvre 
et al., 2006).
16.7 Treatment
Metronidazole 10–15/kg P·O q12h or 15  mg/kg/q12h I·V 
for 5 days (Marks et al., 2002).
17 Brucellosis
17.1 Cause
Brucella abortus, B. canis, B. neotomae, and B. melitensis 
(Xavier et al., 2009).
17.2 Spread
Via coitus (Hubbard et al., 2018), close contact/ingestion of 
tissues, raw milk or other secretions from infected animals 
(Woldemeskel, 2013).
17.3 Hosts
Dogs, cats, humans and several mammals ( Xavier et  al., 
2009).
17.4 Pathogenesis
Entry via digestive/respiratory mucosa is followed by epi -
thelial invasion through M cells ( Cosford, 2018 ) and re -
cruiting GTPases and lipopolysaccharides. These evade 
phagocytosis, antimicrobial peptides release, nitric oxide 
and free radicals that induce pro-inflammatory response via 
IFN-ý to produce lesions (Chacón-Díaz et al., 2015).
17.5 Pathology
Metritis, placentitis, lymphadenitis, gastritis, epididymitis, 
orchitis, prostatitis, bronchopneumonia, omphalitis, arthri -
tis and enteritis (Xavier et al., 2009).
17.6 Clinical signs
Loss of vigor, reproductive failure, abortions between 45 
and 55  days of gestation ( Xavier et  al., 2009 ) with sero -
sanguineous viscous to grayish-green vaginal discharges 
(Santos et al., 2021), ocular disease, disco spondylitis, urine 
retention, fever, submandibular and retropharyngeal lymph-
adenopathy, scrotal enlargement, testicular abscess and 
prostatitis (Makloski, 2011).
17.7 Diagnosis
Agent isolation with biochemical tests (Santos et al., 2021) 
or MALDI-TOF-MS (Lista et al., 2011) from urine or whole 
blood (Alton et al., 1975), PCR, ELISA and CFT (Azevedo 
et al., 2004).
17.8 Treatment
Oxytetracycline for 4  weeks combined with streptomy -
cin in first week ( Zoha and Walsh, 1982), enrofloxacin or 
doxycycline- rifampicin (Mateu-de-Antonio and Martin, 1995).
17.9 Prevention and control
Using screening tests, treating/euthanizing infected animals 
and environmental elimination (Hollett, 2006).
18 Helicobacter infections
18.1 Cause
Helicobacter pylori (Leib and Duncan, 2005).
18.2 Hosts
Dogs, cats, humans and other animals ( Leib and Duncan, 
2005).
18.3 Spread
Is unclear; fecal-oral spread is hypothesized because H. py-
lori can be cultured from cat feces (Dunn et al., 1997).
18.4 Pathogenesis
They contain large quantities of the enzyme urease, which 
results in production of ammonia and bicarbonate from urea 
that alters the pH surrounding the bacteria and helps them 
colonize the acidic environment of the stomach (Lecoindre 
et al., 2000).
18.5 Clinical signs
Gastritis and chronic vomiting (Leib and Duncan, 2005).

Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 34  517
18.6 Pathology
Spiral bacteria can be seen within mucus covering the sur -
face epithelium, within gastric pits, glandular lumen and 
parietal cells (Yamasaki et al., 1998).
18.7 Diagnosis
Endoscopic examination, exploratory celiotomy, gastric bi-
opsy, brush cytology or indirectly by rapid urease testing of 
gastric mucosal samples (Sousa et al., 2017).
18.8 Treatment
Amoxicillin, metronidazole, azithromycin and famotidine or 
combination therapy for 1 week (Neiger and Simpson, 2000).
19 Pseudomoniasis
19.1 Cause
Pseudomonas aeruginosa.
19.2 Hosts
Dog, cat, human and other mammals (Płókarz et al., 2022).
19.3 Spread
Transmission between humans and other mammals via bio-
film formation (Shehab and Al-Rubaii, 2018).
19.4 Pathogenesis
Production of biofilm (Shehab and Al-Rubaii, 2018) along 
with neuraminidase that may release terminal sialic acid 
residues from sialated gangliosides that helps buccal im -
plantation of organism (Soong et al., 2006).
19.5 Clinical signs
Cutaneous ulcers, hemorrhagic crusts, erythematous pap -
ules (Hillier et al., 2006 ), systemic and urinary tract infec -
tions, otitis externa ( Robinson et al., 2019 ), conjunctivitis, 
rhino sinusitis, periapical tooth abscesses and periodontal 
disease (Riggio et al., 2011).
19.6 Diagnosis
Clinical signs, DNA extraction (Płókarz et al., 2022), PCR, 
microtiter plate method (O'Toole, 2011).
19.7 Treatment
Enrofloxacin, ciprofloxacin, gentamicin and ceftazidime 
(Dégi et al., 2021).
Acknowledgments
The author gladly acknowledges Professor Khadija Abdullahi, Doctors 
A.Y Kurami, B.M Isa, M.A Galadima, Abba Idris, Ahmad Muqaddas, 
Aminu Zugu, Paggio Munyanyi, Thelma Zvavamwe, B.M Sani (All 
DVM), Muhammad Mahadi (MBBS), Abdulkarim Attamimi and all 
Paws and Claws Specialist Veterinary Clinic Riyadh Crew.

518 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats

Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 34  519

520 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats

Bacterial diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 34  521

522 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats

523

Chapter 35
Fungal diseases of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
With the use of increasingly potent immunosuppressive 
drug regimens for longer periods of time, fungus infections 
in pets have become more frequent in recent years, as has 
the use of antifungal medications. Early diagnosis for more 
successful therapy has been a focus, as has the search for 
novel, more potent antifungal drugs as well as those with 
distinct mechanisms of action. This presentation aims to 
give an overview of several fungi diseases in animals, de -
scribe the use of some diagnostic tools, and highlight some 
of the most effective antifungal medications ( Gionfriddo, 
2000).
2 Mechanisms of immunosuppression in 
dogs and cats
Single-agent glucocorticoid therapy was the gold standard 
for treating immune-mediated diseases in animals for a very 
long time. Glucocorticoids have nonselective effects on the 
host immune system, which include cytokine inhibition 
and release, reduced macrophage Fc receptor expression 
and function, decreased phagocytosis, diminished macro -
phage antigen processing and presentation, and diminished 
lymphocyte counts ( Tizard, 2009). The cell-mediated Th1 
response, which is in charge of defense against fungi, is in-
hibited. Unfortunately, glucocorticoids alone are frequently 
insufficient to treat severe immune-mediated disease mani-
festations, and because of their unpleasant side effects in 
dogs, veterinarians frequently supplement glucocorticoids 
with other immunosuppressants approved by the FDA. 
These include alkylating drugs (such as cyclophosphamide 
and chlorambucil), folic acid antagonists (such as metho -
trexate), and nucleotide analogues (such as azathioprine 
(Archer, 2017 ). Mycophenolate and leflunomide limit B 
and T cell proliferation and clonal expansion by preventing 
purine and pyrimidine production (Tizard, 2009).
According to published case studies, administration of 
cyclosporine might increase the risk of development of op-
portunistic fungal infections in dogs. This may be because 
cyclosporine inhibits T helper cell activities, which are cru-
cial for the host’s defense against fungal infection. A gene 
transcription factor called nuclear factor of activated T cells 
is triggered when cyclosporine enters the T cell and binds 
to cyclophilin, blocking calcineurin (an intracellular phos -
phatase). As a result, the Th1 response is suppressed, and 
IL-2 and IFN-g production is reduced. Cyclosporine dosage 
affects how much immunosuppression a dog experiences 
(Archer et al., 2014).
3 Opportunistic fungal infections
Opportunistic mycoses, which are rarely harmful to im -
munocompetent hosts, are suddenly emerging as important 
disease-causing agents in immunocompromised dogs and 
cats. The majority of opportunistic fungi, in contrast to 
endemic mycoses like histoplasmosis, blastomycosis, and 
sporotrichosis, lack sufficient distinctive morphologic traits 
to permit genus- or species-level classification solely based 
on morphology, necessitating culture or molecular testing 
for definitive identification. As a result, many practitioners 
will come with these fungi for the first time, whether a his-
tologic investigation of a skin biopsy or a cytologic exami-
nation of a lymph node aspirate results in a diagnosis of 
fungal infection without further identification or classifica-
tion. Fortunately, with a thorough histologic or cytologic 
description, morphologic criteria including pigmentation, 
hyphal diameter, frequency of septation, and tissue distribu-
tion can typically be divided into therapeutically relevant 
categories with a complete histologic or cytologic descrip -
tion (Archer et al., 2014; Dedeaux et al., 2018).
Animals on two immunosuppressive medicines, one of 
which is cyclosporine, or canines on any three immunosup-
pressive drugs, according to the researchers, are at the great-
est risk of opportunistic fungal infection. Natural sources 
of immunocompromise, in addition to medication therapy, 
may predispose to opportunistic mycoses. Candida spp. uri-
nary tract infection in diabetic dogs and cats, as well as dis-
seminated aspergillosis and hyalohyphomycosis in German 
Shepherd dogs with suspected familial multifactorial

524 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
 immunodeficiency, Pneumocystis pneumonia in miniature 
dachshunds with combined variable immunodeficiency, 
systemic mold infection in young dogs with Imerslund-
Grasbeck syndrome, and phaeohyphomycosis ) Erles et al., 
2018). As a result, the goal of this study is to make it easier 
to recognize and treat fungal saprophyte infections, with an 
emphasis on infections linked to immunosuppressive phar -
macological therapy (Dedeaux et al., 2018).
3.1 Phaeohyphomycosis
They are saprophytic fungi which create pigmented 
(or dematiaceous) yeast or hyphae in tissue, result -
ing in phaeohyphomycosis. Curvularia, Exophiala, 
Fonsecaea, Lecytophora, Microsphaeropsis, Moniliella, 
Mycoleptodiscus, Phialophora, Ramichloridium and 
Scolecobasidium. Cutaneous inoculation is the most com -
mon source of infections of the skin, subcutaneous tissue, 
and central nervous system, as well as widespread disease 
(Bernhardt et al., 2014).
The development of cutaneous lesions in regions in con-
tact with soil, like nose, ears, and fingers, is the characteris-
tic sign of phaeohyphomycosis in immunocompetent cats. 
Direct injection induces infection, which leads to granulo -
matous inflammation that lasts for months ( Krockenberger 
et al., 2010).
Pigmented lesions can be mistaken for melanoma they 
seldom spread beyond the lymph nodes in their region. 
Systemic spread is unusual and has a poor prognosis. 
Animals with a central nervous system infection had a poor 
to fatal prognosis, but new research suggests that combining 
surgery with medication may improve mortality ( Meason-
Smith et al., 2017).
3.2 Hyalohyphomycosis
Infection induced by fungi that develop hyphal elements in 
tissue with nonpigmented (or hyaline) walls is known as hya-
lohyphomycosis. These septate hyphae generally branch at 
acute angles and may have patches of globose swelling, partic-
ularly at the hyphae’s end or between septations (Guarner and 
Brandt, 2011). The majority of these species lack other distin-
guishing morphologic traits, making further identification dif-
ficult. Acremonium, Chrysosporium, Fusarium, Geosmithia, 
Oxyporus, Paecilomyces, Purpureocillium, Pseudallescheria 
and its asexual form (anamorph), Scedosporium, Sagenomella, 
Geomyces, Schizophyllum, Scopulariopsis, Lecythophora, and 
Westerdykella have been documented to cause the disease 
(Armentano et al., 2013). This category excludes aspergillo-
sis which has typical clinical presentations and morphologic 
features (narrow, straight-walled septate hyphae branched at 
acute angles, occasionally with conidia and conidiophores 
when lesions are in the nasal cavity) ( Guarner and Brandt, 
2011). Aspergillus fumigatus causes sinonasal aspergillosis, 
while Aspergillus terreus and Aspergillus deflectus induce  
systemic aspergillosis. When culture or sequencing isn’t 
conducted, other kinds of aspergillosis may be indistin -
guishable from hyalohyphomycosis, and hence may be 
classified into that category. Aspergillus caninus  (previ -
ously Phialosimplex caninus) and Aspergillus alabamensis 
develop irregular hyphae and many round to ovoid fungal 
forms in tissue of immunosuppressed dogs ( Sigler et  al., 
2013).
Hyalohyphomycosis affects dogs more frequently than 
cats, with large-breed dogs being the most typically af -
fected. In immunocompetent pets, symptoms include poor 
body condition, fever, lameness, lymphadenomegaly, os -
teomyelitis, diskospondylitis, pneumonia, and chorioreti -
nitis beside central nervous system and ocular indications, 
which are comparable to those seen in systemic aspergil -
losis (Cook et  al., 2015). The kidney, liver, spleen, heart, 
bone marrow, skin, bladder, pancreas, thyroid, and adrenal 
gland have all been described as infection sites (Ribas et al., 
2015). The prognosis is bleak to bad, and large mortality 
rates have been observed (Sigler et al., 2013). When immu-
nosuppressive drugs are used to treat hyalohyphomycosis in 
dogs, the clinical course may differ in two ways from that of 
immunocompetent dogs. First, the disease could be limited 
to the skin with no signs of systemic spread ( Kano et al., 
2011). Second, like phaeohyphomycosis, animals on immu-
nosuppressive therapy may respond more readily to medical 
therapy than immunocompetent cases, but only if cyclo -
sporine can be discontinued and other immunosuppressant 
medications can be tapered (Armstrong et al., 2012).
3.3 Eumycotic mycetoma
Chronic pyogranulomatous lesions associated with the 
growth of fungal colonies that appear histologically as ag -
gregates of fungal hyphae and grossly as tissue grains are 
referred to as “eumycotic mycetoma.” Mycetomas are fur -
ther divided into two types based on the causative fungus: 
pigmented fungi that generate black-grain mycetoma and 
nonpigmented fungi that cause white-grain mycetoma. 
Black-grain mycetomas are darkly colored nodular lesions 
with draining tracts in the epidermis and subcutaneous tis -
sue caused by the direct implantation of fungi from the soil 
(Sun et al., 2013). Bone may be involved in some lesions. In 
pets, Cladophialophora bantiana , Curvularia lunata , and 
Madurella spp. have been identified as the causal agents of 
black-grain mycetoma (Guillot et al., 2004). Psychromonas 
boydii or Acremonium species are the most common causes 
of white-grain mycetomas, which appear as chronic body 
wall or intra-abdominal granulomas months to years after 
a contaminated penetrating wound or surgical site, espe -
cially after dehiscence. A draining tract or mass involving 
the body wall, an intra-abdominal mass, or peritonitis are all 
possible clinical symptoms ( Allison et al., 1989 ). Because

Fungal diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 35  525
the causative agents of eumycotic mycetoma are naturally 
resistant to antifungal drugs, vigorous surgical excision of 
all affected tissues with broad margins is the preferred treat-
ment. Unfortunately, the position of the lesion may prevent 
full excision. Debulking the lesions followed by long-term 
triazole therapy, on the other hand, may improve quality of 
life for a long time due to the slow growth of the lesions 
that are uncommon to spread beyond surrounding tissues 
(Janovec et al., 2016).
3.4 Microsporum canis
As pets and companion animals, cats are becoming in -
creasingly popular abandoned and available for adoption at 
animal shelters for nearly nothing. Buying pricey purebred 
cats from breeding facilities is also popular. Animals are ac-
quired from communities in both circumstances and may 
be infected with diseases that are transmissible to humans, 
whether visible or not. Microsporum canis-induced derma-
tophytosis is the most common zoonosis that can arise in 
such circumstances ( Chermette et  al., 2008 ). Rapid turn -
over of cats of unknown status, promiscuity, and financial 
limits for healthcare all enhance the danger of spread and 
persistence of M. canis in shelters where suitable antifungal 
treatments are either absent or incomplete. Asymptomatic 
carriage is common, with cats infected without showing any 
clinical indications (Mignon and Losson, 1997).
3.5 Sporothrix brasiliensis
Research in Sporothrix taxonomy has resulted in the iden -
tification of a clinically important clade that includes four 
dimorphic species: S. brasiliensis, S. schenckii, S. globosa, 
and S. luriei, which are distinct from environmental clades 
that include S. chilensis, S. pallida, and S. mexicana, which 
cause occasional infections in virulence profiles, antifungal 
susceptibilities, and geographic ranges of species (Marimon 
et al., 2007). Trauma with soil and plant materials is the tradi-
tional transmission route for pets. S. brasiliensis outbreaks, 
on the other hand, are frequently caused by alternate routes 
of transmission such as animal-animal or animal-human  
transmission (Rodrigues et al., 2016). Unfortunately, sporo-
trichosis in cats is not a notifiable disease. To comprehend 
the epidemic scenario caused by S. brasiliensis, some as -
pects of the host-pathogen-environment interplay must be 
considered, such as cats’ high susceptibility to the fungal 
species; the high virulence of S. brasiliensis circulating dur-
ing epidemics associated with a recent introduction of the 
pathogen in an urban feline population. Regarding some 
aspects of cat behavior, including toileting habits in touch 
with soil, sharpening nails in the environment, behavior 
during mating, and territorial disputes that frequently result 
in scratches or bites that transmit the fungus to additional 
hosts, should also be considered (Alba-Fierro et al., 2016).
3.6 Aspergillosis
In animals, aspergillosis refers to a variety of diseases rang-
ing from localized infections to lethal systemic infections, 
as well as allergic reactions produced by Aspergillus fungi 
(Seyedmousavi et  al., 2015 ). This genus contains several 
saprobic filamentous fungi that are typically found in soil, 
decaying plants, and on seeds and grains, with the ability 
to infect different living animal hosts ( Heitman, 2011 ). 
Despite the fact that the genus has over 300 species, ani -
mal aspergilloses are primarily caused by Ammophilus fu-
migatus and a few other species ( Heitman, 2011 ). There 
are 22 sections under classification of genus Aspergillus 
like Aspergillus, Fumigati, Circumdati, Terrei, Nidulantes, 
Ornati, Warcupi, Candidi, Restricti, Usti, Flavipedes, and 
Versicolores (Peterson et al., 2008 ). In animals, aspergillo-
sis is largely a respiratory disease that can spread to other 
areas of the body. However, tissue preference differs by spe-
cies. Aspergillosis can occur in healthy animals as a result 
of stress or other immune-compromising disorders ( Zmeili 
and Soubani, 2007).
In pets, the most common symptoms of aspergillosis 
are sinonasal, bronchopulmonary, and disseminated infec -
tions (Barrs and Talbot, 2014). The most common causative 
agent of sinoorbital aspergillosis in cats with underlying 
illness (such as feline Immunodeficiency Virus and Feline 
Leukemia Virus) is Aspergillus felis, followed by cryptic 
species of the section Fumigati, such as A. udagawae and 
A. viridinutans (Barrs et al., 2013) (Fig. 1).
3.7 Mucormycosis
Mucormycosis is an opportunistic infection caused 
by fungi belonging to the Mucorales order of the old 
Zygomycetes class ( Hoffmann et  al., 2013 ). Rhizopus, 
Mucor, Rhizomucor, Lichtheimia (previously Absidia), 
Apophysomyces, Cunninghamella, and Saksenaea are the 
most frequently identified sections within the order. The 
Mucorales’ native habitat is soil away from rotting or -
ganic matter. Fungi can also be present in the air, food, and 
dust, both indoors and outdoors ( Hoffmann et  al., 2013 ). 
Mucormycosis is identical in epidemiology, portal of entry, 
localization, and formation of lesions in domesticated and 
wild animals. Infection with Mucorales members are seen 
in hosts who are immunocompromised or otherwise debili-
tated due to metabolic problems (Jensen et al., 1992). Some 
incidences of mucormycosis in dogs and cats have been 
identified as a cause of enteritis or systemic dissemination 
(Awadin et al., 2015).
3.8 Candidiasis
Candida is classed based on phylogenetic relationships into 
around 200 species, 15 of which have been isolated from

526 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
infected people and animals ( Yapar, 2014). Candida albi-
cans, Candida glabrata , Candida parapsilosis , Candida 
tropicalis, and Candida krusei are the most common patho-
gens. Odds (1988)  classified these species as commensal 
and facultatively harmful since they are widely present in 
the microbiota of healthy individuals. While C. albicans  
and Candida glabrata appear to be found in warm-blooded 
hosts, other infectious Candida species have been discov -
ered in the environment. Infections are mainly generated 
by commensally precolonized strains rather than vertical or 
longitudinal transmission; hence, the zoonotic potential is 
regarded minimal (Odds et al., 2006).
Candidiasis can be superficial, affecting the skin, gas -
trointestinal, and urogenital tract mucosal membranes. 
Candidemia or localized infection of internal organs can re-
sult from fungus dissemination. Veterinary candidiasis lacks 
epidemiological data and a comprehensive examination of 
risk factors ( Pohlman and Chengappa, 2013 ). Cutaneous 
candidiasis is common in dogs and is often associated with 
atopy, immunosuppressive disorders, or immunosuppressive 
pharmacological treatment similar to Malassezia infections 
(Moretti et al., 2004). In pets, systemic candidiasis is uncom-
mon. However, surgery and trauma by foreign bodies can 
introduce Candida into deeper tissue or the peritoneal cav -
ity, resulting in granuloma formation or peritonitis (Burgess 
and Gaunt, 2014 ). Candidiasis of the urinary tract appears 
as candiduria and cystitis and is commonly associated with 
antibiotic treatment for past bacterial infections or diabetes 
mellitus. Disseminated candidiasis has been observed with 
a variety of symptoms that can include myocarditis, endo -
carditis, and endophthalmitis. Candidiasis can also occur as 
a result of bacterial infections. It should be considered as a 
possibility, especially if the hosts are resistant to antibiotic 
therapy (Álvarez-Pérez et al., 2016) (Fig. 2).
3.9 Blastomycosis
Blastomycosis is caused by infection with Blastomyces 
dermatitidis spores, which is most typically transmitted 
through inhalation. Moisture-rich, acidic soil with decaying 
vegetation or animal feces are ideal conditions for fungus 
growth (Klein et  al., 1986 ). Klein et  al. (1986)  proposed 
that environmental dampness plays a key role in the spread 
of spores. The Mississippi, Missouri, and Ohio river val -
leys are among the areas with the highest occurrence of 
blastomycosis. The disease is also prevalent in the middle 
Atlantic and southern states, and the southern Canadian 
waterways, whereas outbreaks have been observed in other 
areas ( Cote et  al., 1997 ). Infection happens when dog or 
cat inhales conidiophores. However, localized disease can 
also be caused via inoculation. Dogs are more commonly 
afflicted than other animals (Miller et al., 1990). After inha-
lation, infectious conidia are phagocytized by alveolar mac-
rophages and converted from the mycelial to the yeast phase 
(aided by normal body temperatures). The yeast forms are 
thick-walled structures with a diameter of (8–12  μm) that 
lack a capsule and bud to produce daughter cells with 
broad attachments. Yeast can cause a localized infection or 
spread hematogenously or via lymphatics to distant organs 
(Feldman and Ettinger, 2010).
In dogs, young large breeds (2–4  years) of both sexes 
are typical targets for blastomycosis ( Arceneaux et  al., 
1998). Symptoms appear weeks to months after the in -
fection occurs as: anorexia, depression, lethargy, weight 
loss, cachexia, and fever. Dissemination occurs through 
lymphatic and hematogenous pathways and appears in the 
eye, skeletal system, skin, and lymph nodes. Symptoms 
are frequently linked to more than one location at the same 
time. In dogs with pulmonary infection, indications such 
FIG. 1 Exophthalmos (A), mass in the left pterygopalatine fossa (B), and ulceration of the hard palate (C) due to retrobulbar fungal granulomas in cats 
with sino-orbital aspergillosis (Barrs et al., 2012).

Fungal diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 35  527
as tachypnea, dyspnea, cyanosis, or respiratory distress 
occur in 65%–85% of the time. Lymphadenopathy affects 
30%–50% of cases and might be mistaken for lymphosar -
coma if a lymph node aspirate or biopsy is not performed 
(Legendre, 1998). In 20%–50% of dogs, ocular involvement 
manifests as chorioretinitis, anterior uveitis, retinal detach -
ment, and secondary glaucoma ( Kerl, 2003). In 10%–15% 
of cases, there is bone involvement, with lesions most typi-
cally occurring over epiphyseal regions below the elbow or 
stifle (Feldman and Ettinger, 2010). Cutaneous symptoms, 
such as nodules, papules, or plaques of various sizes that 
drain sero-sanguineous to purulent exudate, are described 
in 30%–50% of cases. Involvement of the central nervous 
system (CNS) is unusual in dogs with blastomycosis, oc -
curring in less than 5% of cases. Respiratory blastomycosis 
may be linked to pulmonary thromboembolism ( McGuire 
et al., 2002). Blastomycosis is a rare fungus that affects cats. 
It’s uncertain whether age, breed, or sex play a role in the 
likelihood of infection in them ( Miller et al., 1990 ). Feline 
symptoms are comparable to those seen in dogs except that 
cats are more likely to develop CNS disease and big cutane-
ous abscesses (Feldman and Ettinger, 2010).
3.10 Histoplasmosis
Infection with the soil-borne, dimorphic fungus 
Histoplasma capsulatum  causes histoplasmosis. This or -
ganism can withstand extremes in temperature and is most 
commonly found in damp soil containing bird or bat ex -
crement. The Ohio, Missouri, and Mississippi river valleys 
in the United States have the highest number of instances; 
nevertheless, outbreaks can develop in other areas if envi -
ronmental circumstances promote fungal growth. In soil, 
Histoplasma capsulatum  has a free-living mycelial stage 
with free-living microconidia (2–5  μm) or macroconidia 
(5–18 μm) that can infect mammals. Histoplasma organ -
isms have a thin clear halo enclosing a round or crescent-
shaped basophilic cytoplasm that is (2–4  μm) in diameter. 
In most cases, the entrance route is assumed to be respira -
tory. Oral exposure may be feasible in animals with only 
gastrointestinal indications ( Clinkenbeard et  al., 1988 ). 
Once an active infection has been established, the infection 
can spread to any organ. The lungs, gastrointestinal system, 
lymph nodes, spleen, liver, bone marrow, eyes, and adrenal 
glands are the most usually affected organs. In dogs, the 
incubation period is 12–16  days. Point-source outbreaks 
in dogs can occur when they are exposed to highly pol -
luted surroundings. Histoplasmosis can affect both cats 
and dogs equally. Most dogs with histoplasmosis are large 
young breeds. Males are predisposed in a small way, and 
hunting breeds like Brittanys, Pointers, and Weimaraners 
may be overrepresented. Dogs usually show signs of GI 
or respiratory sickness, but rarely both. The most common 
clinical manifestation of histoplasmosis is disseminated 
FIG. 2 Macroscopic lesions: pustular and crusting dermatitis in a Labrador Retriever. Alopecia and crusts affect the face, ears, and legs (A); pustules and 
mottled hyperpigmentation are observed in the abdomen (B); and a whitish-gray exudate in the oral cavity (C) (Declara et al., 2022).

528 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
 histoplasmosis with gastrointestinal involvement. Weight 
loss, hypoalbuminemia, intestinal blood loss (melena or he-
matochezia), and tenesmus are all common GI symptoms 
associated with minor or huge intestinal diarrhea. In up to 
50% of cases, hepatosplenomegaly develops. With pulmo -
nary involvement, coughing, tachypnea, dyspnea, or pleu -
ral effusion would occur associated with fever, anorexia, 
sadness, and significant weight loss. Histoplasmosis, un -
like blastomycosis, is rarely linked with bone, ophthal -
mic, or cutaneous lesions ( Feldman and Ettinger, 2010 ). 
In cats, histoplasmosis is most common among cats under 
the age of 4 years old, regardless of breed or sex. Infection 
with the feline leukemia virus is not linked to an increased 
risk of infection. Weight loss, depression, fever, anorexia, 
and anemia are nonspecific illness symptoms. Dyspnea, 
tachypnea, and abnormal lung sounds are all symptoms 
of pulmonary involvement. Dissemination causes lymph -
adenopathy and hepatosplenomegaly. Bone marrow in -
volvement is common and can be linked to a variety of 
cytopathies. Lesions of the skin, eyes, joints, and mouth 
are infrequent. Osteolytic lesions of the distal appendicular 
skeleton can occur as a result of bone involvement, result -
ing in lameness (Clinkenbeard et al., 1989).
3.11 Coccidiomycosis
Coccidiomycosis is a systemic fungus caused by 
Coccidioides immitis, a soil saprophyte that thrives in sandy, 
alkaline soils in semiarid environments. C. immitis grows as 
a mycelium with thick-walled, barrel-shaped arthroconidia 
(2–4 μm) broad and (3–10  μm) long in the environment. 
The arthroconidia grow to form a spherule (20–200  μm) 
in diameter after inhalation. Dogs are more commonly in -
fected than cats in companion animals. C. immitis’s spread 
is restricted to the lower Sonoran life zone. The southern 
United States, Mexico, and Central and South America 
are all included. Epidemics can be triggered by a trend of 
high rainfall followed by drought. Dust storms and earth -
quakes aid in the transmission of disease. Coccidiomycosis 
is sometimes known as valley fever or San Joaquin valley 
fever, after the regions where it is most commonly recorded 
(Feldman and Ettinger, 2010). The respiratory route is used 
for exposure and infection. However, direct inoculation of 
infective spores causes localized subcutaneous infection. In 
dogs, the incubation period is 1–3 weeks. An inflammatory 
reaction is triggered, resulting in clinical respiratory symp -
toms in the respiratory tract. Other organ systems may be 
involved if spread occurs, including the bones, eyes, heart, 
pericardium, testicles, brain, spinal cord, and visceral or -
gans. People are deemed immune when an infection has 
resolved, but this is not the case for dogs and cats ( Greene 
and Troy, 1995).
Signs in dogs, like other systemic mycoses, appear in 
different breeds like boxers, pointers, Australian shepherds, 
beagles, Scottish terriers, Doberman pinschers, and cocker 
spaniels ( Feldman and Ettinger, 2010 ). The symptoms in 
dogs are largely respiratory in nature, and they may be subtle 
or present only as minor respiratory indications after expo -
sure. Immune response is ineffective in a small percentage 
of animals, and clinical symptoms worsen. The most com -
mon sign is chronic cough that may be dry, or even moist 
and productive. Respiratory lesions can lead to pneumonia, 
which is a serious condition associated with fever, weight 
loss, and anorexia ( Greene and Troy, 1995). In addition to 
respiratory involvement, osseous lesions affect 65% of dogs 
and are sometimes accompanied by draining skin nodules 
(Feldman and Ettinger, 2010 ). Regional lymphadenopathy 
may be detected in conjunction with appendicular skeletal 
abnormalities, but peripheral lymphadenopathy is uncom -
mon. The renal or gastrointestinal systems may be impli -
cated. Infections of the myocardium or pericardium can 
cause cardiac arrhythmias or restrictive pericarditis, leading 
to right or left-sided heart failure ( Greene and Troy, 1995). 
Seizures, behavioral changes, and coma with granulomatous 
meningoencephalitis are symptoms of a CNS illness due to 
coccidiomycosis. Ocular lesions involving the anterior and 
posterior segments are common with coccidiomycosis, but 
they are less common than with other systemic fungal infec-
tions (Kerl, 2003). In comparison to dogs, cats are relatively 
immune to coccidiomycosis. Coccidiomycosis in cats has 
no evident age, breed, or sex predilection. Dermal injection 
with fungus causes skin lesions that can appear in masses, 
or can be linked with abscess or drainage. Localized lymph-
adenopathy with draining lesions is possible. Fever, inappe-
tence, and weight loss are common symptoms in cats with 
this disease. About 25% of infected cats have respiratory 
symptoms similar to those found in dogs (Greene and Troy, 
1995). Ocular disease, including retinal detachment and 
uveitis or iritis, affects about 12% of cats, but CNS involve-
ment is rare (Gionfriddo, 2000).
3.12 Cryptococcosis
Cryptococcosis is caused by a number of Cryptococcus spe-
cies. The most clinically significant agent is Cryptococcus 
neoformans, which survives at normal body temperatures. 
Cryptococcosis, unlike other fungal illnesses, does not 
have a specific geographic distribution. C. neoformans  is 
a saprophytic, spherical, yeast-like fungus with a huge het -
eropolysaccharide capsule (1–30 μm in diameter) that does 
not pick up typical cytologic stains ( Gerds-Grogan and 
Dayrell-Hart, 1997). Cryptococcus reproduces via budding. 
Buds can break off at various phases of development, re -
sulting in differences in the size of organisms in the tissues. 
Environmental sources are most likely to be found around 
avian habitats or in eucalyptus tree leaf and bark litter. The 
most important vector is assumed to be the pigeon; the pi -
geon’s elevated body temperature is thought to protect it

Fungal diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 35  529
from sickness (Chuck and Sande, 1989). Unlike other fungal 
illnesses, cryptococcosis affects cats at a similar or higher 
rate than dogs. The respiratory tract is the most common 
entry point for infection. Cryptococcus is unencapsulated 
in the environment and can be as tiny as 1  μm, allowing it 
to colonize the lungs more easily. Organisms invade the up-
per or lower respiratory system after deposition in tissues, 
where they replenish their capsules. The capsule obstructs 
the natural immune response and organism removal of the 
host. In cats and dogs, CNS involvement is common and can 
develop from hematogenous spread or extension from nasal 
cavity disease (Beatty et al., 2000 ). Corticosteroid therapy 
has aggravated infection in dogs and cats ( Gerds-Grogan 
and Dayrell-Hart, 1997 ). Concurrent feline leukemia virus 
(FeLV) and feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) infec -
tions in cats reduce the chances of a positive therapeutic 
response. However, it’s unclear if FeLV or FIV-positive cats 
are more susceptible to cryptococcosis (Jacobs et al., 1997). 
Immunosuppression has not been demonstrated to enhance 
the risk of cryptococcosis in dogs. There are no evident age 
or gender preferences. In several research, Siamese cats are 
overrepresented (Malik et al., 1992).
Nasal or facial deformities, a tumor projecting from the 
nares, nasal discharge, sneezing, respiratory sounds, or a 
change in voice are all possible symptoms. In 40%–50% 
of cases, skin lesions appear, while ophthalmic and CNS 
symptoms appear in about 15% of cases. Blindness from 
retinal detachment and granulomatous chorioretinitis can 
also occur ( Gionfriddo, 2000 ). Depression, behavioral 
changes, ataxia, vestibular indications, and blindness are 
some of the neurologic symptoms. Lungs are less usually 
afflicted, and cats rarely show symptoms of lower respira -
tory tract disease. Weight loss, listlessness, and anorexia 
are all prevalent symptoms of chronic disease ( Beatty 
et al., 2000). In dogs, affected cases are usually under four, 
though an older dog may be affected. Overrepresented 
breeds include Great Danes, Doberman Pinschers, Labrador 
Retrievers, and American Cocker Spaniels. Seizures, ataxia, 
central vestibular illness, papilledema, cervical discomfort, 
tetraparesis, and multifocal cranial nerve involvement are 
some of the most common symptoms ( Berthelin et  al., 
1994). Granulomatous chorioretinitis, retinal hemorrhage, 
and optic neuritis are all possible ocular disorders. In rare 
situations, skin rashes, fever, and peripheral lymphadenopa-
thy might be detected. Lethargy and weight loss are typical 
unspecific symptoms (Kerl, 2003) (Fig. 3).
3.13 Paracoccidioidomycosis
Paracoccidioidomycosis is an enzootic mycosis caused by 
inhaling infective Paracoccidioides spp. conidia that found 
in the environment. P . brasiliensis and P . lutzii, two dimor-
phic fungi belonging to the Ajellomycetaceae family, cause 
the disease which is the major systemic mycosis reported in 
dogs in Latin American countries (Coutinho et al., 2015).
4 Mycotoxins and mycotoxicoses
Mycotoxins are fungal-derived compounds that are harm -
ful to (warm-blooded) animals. Mycotoxins are secondary 
metabolites created by the metabolism of acetates, meval -
onates, malonate, and certain amino acids through a series 
of biochemically simple intermediary products ( Aupanun 
et al., 2016). Contamination of animal feeds with mycotox-
ins is a global issue, and the production of mycotoxins is un-
questionably one of the major threats to their health (Kabak 
FIG. 3 Case 1. (A) Cat presenting a firm subcutaneous swelling over the forehead, bilateral ocular seropurulent secretion, and polyp-like mass in the 
nostrils. (B) Case 1 after the disappearance of all the clinical signs initially presented, which occurred after 6 months of fluconazole therapy (Brito-Santos 
et al., 2019).

530 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
et al., 2006 ). Fungal genus, structure, and (or) method of 
action are used to classify mycotoxins. A single species of 
fungus can create one or more mycotoxins, while various 
fungal species can produce distinct mycotoxins. Aflatoxins, 
ochratoxins, trichothecenes, zearalenone, fumonisins, trem-
orgenic toxins, and ergot alkaloids are the most common 
mycotoxins that affect animal health (Kensler et al., 2011). 
Mycotoxins result in reduced immunity associated with se-
rious disorders known as acute or chronic mycotoxicoses 
that vary by species and host vulnerability. Acute myco -
toxicoses have a quick onset with visible toxic response, 
whereas the most common type of mycotoxicoses develops 
after a long period of exposure to low doses of the toxin(s) 
(Reeves et al., 2004).
Tremorgenic mycotoxicosis has been linked to the in -
take of a range of moldy foods in dogs, including cereals, 
walnuts, almonds, and peanuts, as well as nonspecific rub -
bish. Canines are more likely to be affected than other do -
mestic animals, owing to their proclivity for scavenging; 
poisoning of multiple dogs in the same household has also 
been observed. The fungi of the genus Penicillium are the 
most common donors of tremorgenic mycotoxins ( Barker 
et al., 2013). Aflatoxin B1, B2, G1, G2, and M1, ochratoxin 
A, patulin, and toxins generated by Fusarium molds, such 
as fumonisins (B1, B2, and B3), trichothecenes (princi -
pally nivalenol, deoxynivalenol, T-2, and HT-2 toxin), and 
zearalenone, are the mycotoxins of greatest importance in 
terms of food safety ( Bennett et al., 2007 ). The most dan -
gerous compounds are aflatoxins and ochratoxins, which 
have been found to be genotoxic, meaning they can damage 
DNA and cause cancer in animals. Aflatoxins are difura -
nocoumarol lactons by structure, and roughly 20 variants 
have lately been discovered. The most common aflatoxins 
are B1, B2, G1, and G2, with toxicity decreasing in the or -
der AFB1  > AFG1 > AFB2 > AFG2. Ochratoxin A (OTA, 
the most dangerous), B, C (ethylester OTA), and D are 
all polyketide derivatives of dihydroisocoumarin. Barley, 
ray, oat, wheat, rice, maize, beer, coffee, tea, wine/raisins, 
spices, and porcine products (meat, viscera) and other meat 
and meat products of nonruminant animals exposed to this 
form of mycotoxin are among the sources ( Kensler et al., 
2011).
5 Diagnosis and treatment of mycotic 
infections in dogs and cats
The fungal organism is visualized on cytology and/or histol-
ogy, which typically presents a nodular to diffuse pyogranu-
lomatous inflammatory pattern. The diagnostic sensitivity 
of fungal stains like Gomori-methenamine silver or peri -
odic acid-Schiff can be improved. Fungus culture and iden-
tification of the fungal species based on morphology and 
pigmentation traits by specialized laboratories are used to 
make a definitive diagnosis. Only few times the molecular 
methods have been utilized to identify harmful fungus spe-
cies (Maeda et al., 2008) as shown in Table 1.
6 Conclusion
Over the past few decades, fungi have become more preva-
lent and are responsible for a wide range of illnesses, from 
minor local infections to severe morbidity and mortality in 
animals. Fungal infections can either be restricted to the 
body’s surface or they can develop into systemic infec -
tions, which are characterized by the fungus entering the 
body and then spreading to other tissues. Most fungi infec -
tions are contracted by the skin, ingestion, or inhalation. 
Some fungal infections that affect pets are zoonotic, mean-
ing that animals can spread the sickness to the owner. The 
lack of distinct early-stage signs and symptoms, the dwin -
dling number of clinical mycologists, the expense, and the 
absence of quick and precise diagnostic procedures make 
it difficult to diagnose fungal infections in dogs and cats. 
Reduced morbidity, mortality, and treatment costs are all 
TABLE 1 Drugs commonly used for the treatment of 
mycotic infections in dogs and cats as mentioned by 
Dedeaux et al. (2018).
Drug Dose Frequency
Flucytosine 125 mg per cat PO q6–8 h
Voriconazole Not currently 
recommended
4–5q12 h
Posaconazole Loading dose of 
15 followed by 
7.5 PO q24 h or 
loading dose of 30 
followed by 15 PO 
q48 h
5q48 h
Deoxycholate 
amphotericin B
Dogs: 0.5 mg/kg in 
1 L D5W
Cats: 0.25 mg/kg 
in 250 mL D5W IV 
over 4–6 h
A total dose of 
4–6 mg/kg or 
azotemia occurs
Fluconazole Cats: 50 mg/cat/d
Dogs: 2.5–10 mg/
kg/d PO
q24 h; divide high 
doses and give 
q8–12 h
Itraconazole 5–10 mg/kg PO q12–24 h
Abelcet 
(amphotericin B 
lipid complex)
Dogs: 2–3 mg/kg
Cats: 1 mg/kg IV; 
dilute in D5W to 
1 mg/kg; give over 
1–2 h
9–12 treatments
Terbinafine Cats: 10–30 mg/kg
Dogs: 10 mg/kg PO
q24 h

Fungal diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 35  531
benefits of early  detection of a fungal infection. Fungal ill -
nesses are typically treated with chemotherapy. Few agents 
have been approved for widespread usage of antifungal 
medications in pets, and these medications are sometimes 
quite expensive and hazardous to animals. As a result, sys -
temic form has few therapeutic alternatives. These medi -
cations frequently require longer treatment times than 
antibacterial medications.

532 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats

533

Chapter 36
Common viral diseases of dogs and cats
1 Viral diseases of dogs
1.1 Canine adenovirus
There are two types of canine adenovirus (CA V): canine 
adenovirus type 1 (CA V-1), and canine adenovirus type 2 
(CA V-2) (Fig. 1). CA V-1 causes infectious canine hepatitis 
(ICH or Rubarth’s disease), while CA V-2 (Kennel cough) 
is associated with the respiratory type of disease in dogs 
(Chander et al., 2021).
1.1.1 Etiology
Canine adenovirus (CA V) is a nonenveloped icosahe -
dral double-stranded DNA virus, belonging to the family 
Adenoviridae and genus Mastadenovirus. It is further di -
vided to serotype CA V-1 and CA V-2 based on genetic and 
antigenic characteristics ( Ozkan Timurkan et  al., 2018 ). 
Some common differences between the two serotypes are 
stated in Table 1.
1.1.2 Epidemiology
CA Vs occur worldwide and are endemic in dogs. Other 
species such as red foxes, wolves, and coyotes are highly 
susceptible. CA V-1 is a life-threatening disease in puppies, 
while CA V-2 is common among dogs used for breeding. 
CA Vs are moderately resistant to the environment, thus usu-
ally occurring in crowded and poor hygienic environments 
of puppies. The occurrence of CA V-2 has been reported 
in many countries such as Canada, Italy, Brazil, and India 
(Balboni et al., 2013; Ramidi et al., 2019; Silva et al., 2014).
1.1.3 Transmission
CA V-1 is transmitted via the oronasal route through direct 
and indirect contact with viruses shed in oronasal secre -
tions, urine, and feces during the acute phase of infection 
(Sykes, 2014a ). The CA V-2 is highly contagious and 
transmitted via nasal secretions ( Evermann and Kennedy, 
2011). Recovered dogs from adenoviral infection and vac -
cinated dogs do serve as carriers and can shed the virus 
 continuously for a prolonged period of time, thus serving as 
a source of infection to puppies and pregnant dogs (Taguchi 
et al., 2011).
1.1.4 Clinical manifestation
The CA V-2 is characterized by respiratory disorders due 
to its affinity for the epithelium of the upper respiratory 
tract, hence clinical signs such as tonsillitis, pharyngitis, 
tracheitis, and bronchitis ( Mochizuki et al., 2008 ). CA V-2 
has been reported to infect the intestinal tract, which is the 
predilection site for CA V-1. The CA V-1 is mostly asymp-
tomatic but also manifests with multisystemic symptoms 
which cause acute or chronic disease syndromes. Clinical 
signs vary based on major organ injury which includes in -
appetence, lethargy, vomiting, diarrhea, pyrexia, tonsilli -
tis, conjunctivitis, and corneal edema (classical blue eye) 
(Sykes, 2014a). CA V-1 infection in pregnancy may result 
in stillbirths or weak puppies that die within a few days 
post whelping. Neurological signs which are common with 
wild animals have been reported in puppies (Hornsey et al., 
2019). The predominant organ injury with CA V-1 is the 
liver, where it causes hepatic necrosis.
1.1.5 Diagnosis
Diagnosis of CA V-1 and CA V-2 is usually based on virus isola-
tion from oronasal swabs and fecal samples. CA V-1 and CA V-2 
can be difficult to differentiate in the laboratory by hemagglu-
tination and neutralization tests, especially when the infection 
manifests with multisystemic signs (Parthiban et al., 2014).
1.1.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no specific therapy for CA Vs infection, but broad-
spectrum antibiotics and symptomatic supportive therapy 
are usually instituted ( Chethan et  al., 2021 ). Vaccination

534 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
with CA V-1 and CA V-2 (Fig. 2)-modified live vaccines is 
highly effective, and immunity develops about 5 days post-
vaccination. The duration of immunity after vaccination is 
about 9  years ( Tizard, 2021 ). Vaccination should be car -
ried out in series for puppies, a booster at 6  months, and 
a second booster at age 1  year. Adult dogs in proximity to 
pregnant dogs and puppies should receive regular boosters 
to minimize viral shedding. Avoid overcrowding of pup -
pies, and the environment should be regularly cleaned and 
disinfected.
1.2 Influenza virus—H3N8, H3N2
Canine influenza virus (CIV) is caused mainly by H3N8 
and H3N2; both infections occur in dogs and manifest 
as mild upper respiratory tract symptoms ( Parrish and 
V oorhees, 2019).
1.2.1 Etiology
Canine influenza viruses (CIVs) are members of the genus 
influenza A viruses (IA Vs), among the family orthomyxo-
viridae. The two popular strains that have emerged are the 
H3N8 which originated from equine ( Fig.  3) ( Crawford 
et al., 2005), and H3N2 which originated from avian (Song 
et  al., 2008 ). Table  2 shows some differences between 
H3N2 and H3N8 strains.
1.2.2 Epidemiology
Canine influenza A H3N8 was first reported in United States 
and has continued to spread across the states ( Pecoraro 
et  al., 2014). However, H3N2 virus was first detected in 
South Korea, but cases have been reported in United States, 
Thailand, Canada, and China (Zhu et al., 2015). Dogs of all 
FIG. 1 A comparison of 3D reconstruction of CA V-2 (A) and electromicroscopy image (B). (From Schoehn, G., el Bakkouri, M., Fabry, C.M.S., Billet, 
O., Estrozi, L.F ., Le, L., Curiel, D.T., Kajava, A.v., Ruigrok, R.W.H., Kremer, E.J., 2008. Three-dimensional structure of canine adenovirus serotype 2 
capsid. J. Virol. 82 (7), 3192–3203. https://doi.org/10.1128/jvi.02393-07.)
TABLE 1 Some features distinguishing CAV1 and CAV2 
(Zhu et al., 2022).
Features CAV1 CAV2
Fiber diameter 45 = 47 nm 35–37 nm
Viral genome Inverted terminal 
repeat (ITR) is 
161 bp
ITR is 196 bp
Culture 
characteristic
Progeny viruses are 
released through 
degeneration of 
nuclear membrane
Progeny viruses 
are released 
through budding 
of nuclear 
membrane
Pathogenicity 
characteristic
Virulent strain Attenuated strain
Tissue tropism High tropism for 
epithelial cells of 
liver and lung
High affinity for 
epithelial cells of 
respiratory tract 
and intestine
Host spectrum Extensive Narrow
Clinical 
manifestation
Canine hepatitis Tracheobronchitis

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  535
ages are generally susceptible to CIV with a morbidity rate 
of 60%–80% in kennel outbreaks. H3N2 has been reported 
in cats and manifested with respiratory signs. Break of the 
species barrier is common with influenza A viruses, but ad-
aptation to a new species is not common (Collisson, 2020). 
Mutation keeps occurring as influenza A virus  circulates in 
dogs; thus, subtypes such as H1N1 and H5N1 have been 
reported in dogs, but transmission to other dogs has not 
occurred.
1.2.3 Transmission
CIV is transmitted through direct or indirect contact with na-
sal secretions and also by aerosol. Transmission easily occurs 
in conditions of a large gathering of dogs such as kennels.
FIG. 2 A structural model of Canine Adenovirus Serotype 1 (A) and Serotype 2 vaccines (B). (Creative Biolabs.)
FIG. 3 A schematic diagram showing the origination of canine influenza virus H3N8 from the horse. (Today’s Veterinary Practice.)

536 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
1.2.4 Clinical manifestation
The incubation period is 2–3  days, hence a rapid manifes -
tation of influenza-like signs such as nasal discharge, an -
orexia, sneezing, lethargy, cough, and ocular discharge.
1.2.5 Diagnosis
Clinical signs of CIV are similar to signs of other respiratory 
pathogens infecting dogs, hence making diagnosis difficult. 
A good diagnosis of CIV depends on the timing of the sample 
collection for agent detection tests. Viral isolation is done us-
ing either Madin-Darby canine kidney (MDCK) cells or em-
bryonated chicken eggs. RT-PCR targeting the matrix gene 
is a reliable test for the diagnosis of CIV (Shu et al., 2011).
1.2.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
Treatment is mostly by supportive therapy and also using 
a broad-spectrum antibiotic to prevent or treat secondary 
bacterial pneumonia and provide conditions for the im -
mune system to respond ( Collisson, 2020). During an out -
break, quarantine of affected kennels is crucial to mitigate 
the spread of the virus. Vaccination against CIV (especially 
H3N2) using killed adjuvant vaccines is being carried 
out in the United States and South Korea. Currently, live-  
attenuated influenza vaccines are available for the control 
and prevention of H3N8 (Nogales et al., 2017). Considering 
the antigenic drift tendency of the influenza virus, the de -
velopment of a surveillance and control strategy for emerg-
ing influenza virus in dogs is necessary (Xie et al., 2016).
1.3 Canine parainfluenza virus
CPIV-5 is a highly contagious respiratory disease in dogs 
and it is one of the culprits of canine infectious respiratory 
disease (CIRD).
1.3.1 Etiology
PIV-5 is an enveloped, nonsegmented, single-stranded RNA 
virus belonging to the family Paramyxoviridiae, genus 
Rubulavirus (Charoenkul et al., 2021).
1.3.2 Epidemiology
Canine parainfluenza virus type 5 (CPIV-5) causes respi -
ratory disease in dogs with global occurrence. It has been 
reported in several host species such as pigs, cattle, ham -
sters, ferrets, monkeys, calves, lesser pandas, and guinea 
pigs (Zhai et al., 2017).
1.3.3 Transmission
CPIV-5 is shed in nasal secretions 6–8  days postinfection; 
hence, it spread through contact with secretions or via aero-
sols. A cross-species transmission has been reported in coy-
otes, ferrets, and rodents, but no evidence of transmission 
from dogs to humans (Charoenkul et al., 2021).
1.3.4 Clinical manifestation
CPIV-5 causes mild-to-moderate upper tract respiratory dis-
ease in dogs. It is characterized by sudden onset of fever, 
coughing, serous nasal discharge, and malaise (Baümgartner, 
2019). Severe signs develop due to co-infection with viruses 
or bacteria (Kennel cough syndrome) CPIV-5 can manifest 
as neurological disorders, especially in puppies showing 
signs such as encephalitis, seizures, myoclonus, and poste -
rior paresis.
1.3.5 Diagnosis
The clinical signs are similar to other respiratory diseases; 
hence, confirmatory diagnosis relies on viral isolation, and 
molecular detection by RT-PCR from nasal or throat swabs. 
The serological test can also detect the presence of canine 
parainfluenza virus 5, but the result can be complicated in 
vaccinated dogs (MacLachlan et al., 2016).
1.3.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no treatment for CPIV-5 but symptomatic therapy. 
A warm and humid environment should be provided. In the 
case of pneumonia, broad-spectrum antibiotics should be ad-
ministered. Available vaccines are usually included in com-
bination (multivalent) products that also protect against other 
canine viral and microbial pathogens. The vaccine does not 
totally protect the dog against CPIV-5, but will lessen the 
severity and complications during the course of an infection.
1.4 Canine reovirus
It is caused by mammalian reovirus (MRV) which affects a 
wide range of mammals including dogs. It causes symptom-
atic or asymptomatic infection in dogs.
TABLE 2 Some characteristics of canine influenza virus 
H3N2 and H3N8.
Features
Canine influenza 
virus H3N8
Canine influenza 
virus H3N2
Host range Dogs Dogs and cats
Origin Equine Avian
Incubation period 2 weeks 3 weeks
Shedding duration 5 days 24 days
Symptoms Fever, cough, 
sneezing and nasal 
secretions
Coughing, 
sneezing, fever, 
and respiratory 
secretions
Predilection site Household and 
dog shelters
Mostly dog 
kennels

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  537
1.4.1 Etiology
MRV is a double-stranded RNA virus that is small in size, a 
nonenveloped icosahedral virus belonging to the Reoviridae 
family and genus Orthoreovirus (Fig. 4). The specie MRV has 
three serotypes: MRV-1, MRV-2, and MRV-3 which have been 
known to occur in dogs (Decaro and Buonavoglia, 2011).
1.4.2 Epidemiology
Mammalian reovirus has a global occurrence, infecting 
dogs and most mammals. There is an equal geographical 
distribution of the three serotypes in dogs. Co-infection of 
various reovirus serotypes is not uncommon in dogs and 
depends on exposure to the virus. Reovirus seropositivity in 
the healthy dog population is high and comparable to that of 
the human population (Hwang et al., 2014).
1.4.3 Transmission
MRVs are shed in feces and nasal discharges; hence, trans-
mission is via aerosol and feco-oral.
It usually spread among dogs in kennels, boarding, and 
breeding facilities.
1.4.4 Clinical manifestation
MRV in dogs can be symptomatic or asymptomatic but is 
mostly associated with other diseases. The virus has an af -
finity for cells in the respiratory tract which manifests as 
nasal discharge, sore throat, conjunctivitis, and pneumonia. 
It is also found in the gastrointestinal tract with signs like 
diarrhea, dehydration, lethargy, and weight loss. There is a 
possibility of extending to the nervous system causing en -
cephalitis (Knipe et al., 2013).
1.4.5 Diagnosis
Diagnosis is difficult through clinical examination due to the 
similarities of symptoms to other diseases. A  confirmatory 
diagnosis is by viral culture and isolation from a fecal 
sample or nasal discharges and electron microscopy. These 
methods are not sensitive, hence the use of PCR which is 
more sensitive, rapid, and specific ( Muscillo et al., 2001 ). 
Serological testing indicated that dogs are so much exposed 
to reovirus, but are difficult to isolate from dogs with respi-
ratory disease (Sykes, 2014b).
1.4.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
No recommended treatment protocol, but supportive ther -
apy is given based on prevailing clinical signs. Infected 
dogs should be treated in isolation. Avoid overcrowding of 
dogs and monitor them so as to avoid sniffing on feces of 
other dogs because exposure to reovirus infection increases 
with age and in dogs housed outdoors.
1.5 Coronavirus
Canine coronavirus (CCoV) is a highly contagious and in -
fectious disease in dogs all over the world. There are three 
major types of canine coronavirus: canine enteric coronavi-
rus (CECoV), pantropic canine coronavirus (pCCoV), and 
canine respiratory coronavirus (CRCoV).
1.5.1 Etiology
Canine coronavirus is a single-stranded, enveloped, positive-
sense RNA virus (Fig.  5) that belongs to the order Nidovirales,  
family Coronaviridae, subfamily Orthocoronavirinae, which  
has four genera; Alphacoronavirus, Betacoronavirus, Gamma-
coronavirus, and Deltacoronavirus ( Alfano et  al., 2020 ). 
CECoV and pCCoV belong to the genus Alphacoronavirus, 
species, Alphacoronavirus-1, while CRCoV belongs to 
Betacoronavirus (Abd et al., 2021 ) (Fig. 6). CECoV con -
tains two distinct genotypes, CCoV-I and CCoV-II. CCoV-II 
can be further divided into CCoV-IIa and CCoV-IIb, with a 
proposed variant of CCoV-IIc (He et al., 2020).
VirusGenusSub-
familyFamily
Reoviridae
Spinareovirinae
Colivirus
Orthoreovirus
Sedoreovirinae
Rotavirus
Orbivirus
Colorado 
tick fever 
Avian 
orthoreovirus 
Mammalian 
orthoreovirus 
FIG. 4 Taxonomic classification of the causative agent of canine reovirus (mammalian orthoreovirus).

538 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
1.5.2 Epidemiology
CCoV is widespread among the dog population with world-
wide distribution, and it is characterized by high morbid -
ity and low mortality, pCCoV and virulent CCoV-II strains 
can be fatal, especially in puppies. CECoV has been widely 
reported in Japan, Brazil, Greece, Britain, China, Italy, 
Vietnam, Australia, France, and Belgium (Agnihotri, 2018). 
CRCoV is a significant etiologic component of canine in -
fectious respiratory disease and also occurs globally.
1.5.3 Transmission
CECoV and pCCoV are transmitted by direct contact with in-
fected fecal matter or objects contaminated by infected feces. 
CRCoV is transmitted via aerosol from respiratory secretions 
FIG. 5 Schematic structure of Alphacoronavirus (A) and Betacoronavirus (B). (From dos Santos, S.F ., Pereira, L.S., Mendes, J.R., Freitas, I. da S., 
Dourado Filho, M.M.M., Nunes, V .C.S., Lopes, T.R., de Almeida, M.C., de Alencar Filho, J.M.T., Cavalcante, E.A.B., Dourado, N.S., Silva, M.T.A., 2020. 
Abordagens terapêuticas e preventivas emergentes para a covid-19 e papel do farmacêutico frente à pandemia: uma revisão. COVID-19 No Brasil: Os 
Múltiplos Olhares Da Ciência Para Compreensão e Formas de Enfrentamento 2, 144–153. https://doi.org/10.22533/AT.ED.76020190814; and Viralzone.)
FIG. 6 Taxonomy tree showing Canine enteric coronavirus under Alphacoronavirus and Canine respiratory coronavirus under Betacoronavirus. (From 
Abd, A., Wahed, E., Truyen, U., 2021. Canine coronaviruses: emerging and re-emerging pathogens of dogs [Canine Coronaviren: Neu und erneut auftre-
tende Pathogene des Hundes]. Berl. Munch. Tierarztl. Wochenschr. 134, 1. https://doi.org/10.2376/1439-0299-2021-1 .)

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  539
(Haake et al., 2020). Overcrowding and an unhygienic environ-
ment aid the transmission of CCoV . The incubation period from 
ingestion to clinical signs is 1–4 days. The duration of illness is 
2–10 days in most dogs, but viruses are shed for 2 weeks.
1.5.4 Clinical manifestation
CECoV infections are mostly mild, subclinical, and self-
limiting in dogs. It has an affinity for the intestinal cells where it  
replicates, destroying the cells in the process and manifest-
ing signs such as inappetence, vomiting, diarrhea, lethargy, 
dehydration, fever, and a painful abdomen. However, severe 
hemorrhagic diarrhea can occur due to co-infection by other 
enteric viruses. pCCoV is hypervirulent and multisystemic 
in its clinical signs manifestation causing lethargy, hemor -
rhagic diarrhea, ataxia, and seizures ( Haake et  al., 2020). 
CRCoV has an affinity for upper respiratory tracts in dogs, 
especially those in crowded or stressful condition. The virus 
attacks the cells lining of the lungs, causing damage, and 
allowing other opportunistic bacteria. Clinical signs include 
sneezing, coughing, lacrimation, nasal discharge, fever, dys-
pnea, lethargy, and inappetence (Mitchell et al., 2013).
1.5.5 Diagnosis
CCoV is diagnosed by viral culture and isolation, and 
electron microscopy, but both methods are less sensitive. 
Serology is used for monitoring the disease prevalence. 
Molecular detection by PCR is more sensitive and reliable.
1.5.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no specific treatment for CCoV; hence, supportive 
therapy and symptomatic treatment are used. Treatments 
such as fluid therapy, oral antinausea medications, oral 
antidiarrheal medications, gastrointestinal prescription 
foods, probiotics to re-establish gastrointestinal flora, 
anti-inflammatories, and/or cough medicine for coughing 
in dogs with CRCoV are used to mitigate the symptoms. 
Antibiotics are administered to prevent secondary bacte -
rial infections. Withholding food for 24  h after diarrhea 
ceases and gradually reintroducing small amounts of food 
may be the only required treatment. Early medical inter -
vention is the key to the successful treatment of severe 
cases. Canine coronavirus vaccines are available but not 
recommended for all dogs and will be administered based 
on a dog’s lifestyle and risk assessment. Most CCoV vac -
cines are designed based on the classical CCoV-IIa strains, 
hence less effective against CCoV-I. There are differences 
in current circulating CCoV-IIa in comparison with the 
classical CCoV-IIa strains; thus, effectiveness is uncertain 
(He et al., 2020 ).
1.6 Rotavirus infection
Canine rotavirus causes an infectious viral intestinal disease 
in dogs, especially puppies.
1.6.1 Etiology
Canine rotavirus is a nonenveloped, double-stranded 
RNA with a segmented genome, belonging to the family 
Reoviridae, genus rotavirus (Fig. 7). There are eight species 
of rotavirus (A–H), but canine rotavirus belongs to Group 
A which happens to be zoonotic, and serotypes G3, P3, and 
P5A are commonly isolated in dogs (Attoui et al., 2012).
FIG. 7 A schematic structure of rotavirus showing the inner, intermediate, and outer structures. (Viralzone.)

540 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
1.6.2 Epidemiology
Canine rotavirus infection occurs globally in dogs, causing 
mild disease in puppies, but antibody serological surveys 
showed a high prevalence in adult dogs ( de Grazia et  al., 
2007). Dogs with weak immune systems and those living in 
overly stressed environments are most at risk for the infection.
1.6.3 Transmission
Canine rotavirus is transmitted by direct contact with con -
taminated fecal matter. The interspecies transmission also 
occurs among heterologous strains, leading to strain diver -
sity in new hosts (Mosallanejad et al., 2015).
1.6.4 Clinical manifestation
Canine rotavirus is asymptomatic in adult dogs, and mild in 
older pups, but causes acute or moderate enteritis in pups 
less than 2  weeks old where it manifests as diarrhea, an -
orexia, lethargy, fever, and vomiting. Generally, patients 
recover within 2 weeks; however, there are reports of fatal 
severe enteritis in dogs under 2  weeks old ( Ortega et  al., 
2017).
1.6.5 Diagnosis
The serological test is used for monitoring antibodies in dog 
populations (Fig. 8). Viral culture and isolation from the fe-
cal sample are also used. RT-PCR is more effective in the 
identification of species and serotypes.
1.6.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
Treatment is symptomatic which includes fluid therapy, 
dietary restrictions, and administration of antibiotics to 
prevent secondary infection. Infected dogs should be iso -
lated and strict hygiene should be applied in handling feces 
from infected dogs. Puppies should be allowed to suckle 
adequately within the first 2 weeks of their life.
1.7 Astrovirus infection
1.7.1 Etiology
Canine astrovirus (CaAstV) is a small nonenveloped, 
positive-sense RNA virus with a wide host range. They 
belong to the family Astroviridae, which has two genera: 
Mamastrovirus (mostly in mammals) and Avastrovirus 
(found in humans, cows, pigs, sheep, deer, mink, dogs, cats, 
mice, bats, dolphins, rats, chickens, and turkeys (Zhu et al., 
2011).
1.7.2 Epidemiology
CaAstV is globally distributed among diarrheic and healthy 
dogs (Li et al., 2018 ). Dogs less than a year old are more 
susceptible to the infection which can lead to gastroenteri -
tis, especially during co-infection with other enteroviruses 
(Zhou et al., 2017a ). Canine astrovirus (CaAstV) was first 
identified in the United States and has since been reported in 
dogs from Europe, the Far East, and South America (Caddy 
and Goodfellow, 2015).
1.7.3 Transmission
CaAstVs are transmitted via the fecal-oral route either by 
direct contact with feces or the consumption of contami -
nated food or water ( Roach and Langlois, 2021 ). Canine 
astroviruses are antigenically and genetically hetero -
geneous due to an error-prone polymerase and frequent 
recombination events between strains, hence, their abil -
ity to spread among different host species ( Wohlgemuth 
et al., 2019 ).
FIG. 8 Step-by-step methodology for serological detection of canine rotavirus.

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  541
1.7.4 Clinical manifestation
Astroviruses infect diverse hosts and are typically associated 
with gastrointestinal illness, but can also vary from asymp-
tomatic to encephalitis depending on the host and viral geno-
type (Wohlgemuth et al., 2019). CaAstV was reported more in 
dogs with symptoms of gastroenteritis such as diarrhea, fever, 
anorexia, lethargy, etc. than in asymptomatic ones indicating a 
potential role in canine diarrhea (Martella et al., 2012).
1.7.5 Diagnosis
CaAstVs are characterized by genetic heterogeneity, mak -
ing confirmatory diagnosis difficult (Stamelou et al., 2022). 
Electron microscopy observations have been used on stool 
samples ( Fig.  9). The serological test includes the use of 
an indirect immunofluorescence assay to identify specific 
IgGs. Molecular diagnosis is mostly through RT-PCR, but 
qRT-PCR assay is more sensitive due to its ability to differ-
entiate the capsid gene.
1.7.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no treatment protocol for CaAstV infection, but 
symptomatic therapy involves fluid therapy, administra -
tion of antiemetics, antibiotics, and probiotics. Dogs that 
tested positive should be isolated. Good hygiene and sani -
tation are essential to prevent the invasion and spread of 
the virus.
1.8 Calicivirus infection
1.8.1 Etiology
Caliciviruses belong to the family Caliciviridae which is 
currently divided into five genera; Norovirus, Sapovirus, 
Vesivirus, Lagovirus, and Nebovirus. The genera are  further 
divided into several species, of which canine calicivirus 
is under Vesivirus genera. Viruses under this family are 
RNA, nonenveloped, small, positively charged, and single-
stranded (Martella et al., 2015).
1.8.2 Epidemiology
Canine norovirus, sapovirus, and vesivirus are the known 
genera that have been isolated in asymptomatic and diar -
rheic dogs ( Caddy, 2018). Canine norovirus has been iso -
lated in Italy and Portugal. It has genetic heterogeneity 
which allows for its combination with norovirus from other 
animal species leading to diverse strains. Canine sapovirus 
has been detected in diarrheic dogs in UK and Japan. No 
isolation of Canine sapovirus has occurred in healthy dogs. 
Canine vesivirus or calicivirus has been detected in Italy, 
Brazil, and Japan.
1.8.3 Transmission
Canine caliciviruses are transmitted through direct contact 
with saliva, secretions, and feces containing shed viruses.
1.8.4 Clinical manifestation
Symptoms of canine calicivirus are associated with gastro -
enteritis with recovery after a few days. Tropism to other 
cells may occur, leading to other neurological signs and, 
in some instances, glossitis, balanitis, or vesicular vaginitis. 
Isolates from such cases were feline caliciviruses (Vesivirus 
genus) and were likely acquired from cats.
1.8.5 Diagnosis
Calicivirus-like particles have been occasionally identified by 
electron microscopy (Fig. 10) in specimens from dogs with 
diarrhea. Serological tests are mostly used for survey screen-
ing. PCR-based diagnoses are more accurate and reliable.
1.8.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
Treatment is by supportive therapy. Infected dogs should be 
isolated from dogs and other species of animals. Humans 
should maintain strict precautions when attending to in -
fected dogs.
1.9 Canine parvovirus infection
Canine parvovirus (CPV) is a highly contagious, acute, 
virulent, and fatal viral disease that causes gastroenteritis 
in dogs.
1.9.1 Etiology
CPV is a small, single-stranded, nonenveloped DNA vi -
rus that belonged to the family Parvoviridae, subfamily 
Parvovirinae, and the genus protoparvovirus. CPV has two 
FIG. 9 A image of astrovirus under an electron microscope. (From Bosch, 
A., Pintó, R.M., Guix, S., 2014. Human astroviruses. Clin. Microbiol. Rev. 
27 (4), 1048–1074. https://doi.org/10.1128/CMR.00013-14.)

542 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
strains designated as CPV-1 (now under genus bocavirus) and 
CPV-2. CPV-2 is further divided into three variants: CPV-2a, 
CPV-2b, and CPV-2c (Decaro and Buonavoglia, 2012).
1.9.2 Epidemiology
Canine parvovirus is one of the commonest causes of se -
vere viral diarrhea disease in dogs worldwide ( Qi et al., 
2020). CPV is an important cause of mortality and mor -
bidity in dogs, and other Canidae like wolves, foxes, and 
coyotes ( Zhou et al., 2017b ). Puppies less than 4  months 
of age are more susceptible to CPV , also inadequately vac-
cinated and unvaccinated adult dogs. CPV-2c has been re -
ported in some continents of the world ( Lin et al., 2016 ) 
(Fig.  11). Generally, certain breeds such as Rottweilers, 
German Shepherds, Dobermans, Terriers, etc., are pre -
disposed to parvovirus infection ( Houston et  al., 1996 ). 
Outdoor accessibility and season have been identified 
as risk factors for parvoviral enteritis ( Sykes, 2014a ). 
However, the seasonal patterns vary with locations ( Kalli 
et al., 2010).
1.9.3 Transmission
CPV is transmitted via feco-oral through direct contact 
with feces and vomitus from infected dogs and also con -
taminated fomites. Infected dogs begin to shed the vi -
rus a few days prior to the manifestation of symptoms, 
and it declines after 7  days ( Fig.  12). Hence, subclini -
cal infections shed the virus for a longer period and are 
widespread.
1.9.4 Clinical manifestation
The incubation period for CPV infection is 3–7  days, af -
ter which signs such as anorexia, lethargy, fever, depres -
sion, vomiting, diarrhea (mucoid or hemorrhagic) (Fig. 13), 
tachypnea, and dehydration are observed. These signs could 
be worsened due to the CPV variants, coinfection, and re -
combination, hence making control difficult. Cases of sub -
clinical infection mostly occur in puppies with intermediate 
MDA titers and adult dogs. The severity of clinical signs 
depends on factors such as virus strain and immune com -
petency of the infected dog, which is affected by stressors 
FIG.  10 An electron microscope image of Canine calicivirus. (From 
Binn, L.N., Norby, E.A., Marchwicki, R.H., Jarman, R.G., Keiser, P .B., 
Hang, J., 2018. Canine caliciviruses of four serotypes from military and 
research dogs recovered in 1963-1978 belong to two phylogenetic clades 
in the Vesivirus genus. Virol. J. 15 (1), 1–9. https://doi.org/10.1186/
S12985-018-0944-4/FIGURES/2.)
FIG. 11 Global distribution of canine parvovirus variant CPV-2c. (From Lin, C.-N., Chiang, S.-Y., Lin, C.-N., Chiang, S.-Y., 2016. Canine parvovirus 
type 2. In: Canine Medicine-Recent Topics and Advanced Research. IntechOpen. https://doi.org/10.5772/65801.)

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  543
such as weaning and overcrowding, maternal antibody, and 
the presence of concurrent infections such as other enteric 
viral and parasitic infections. Clinical blood pictures usu -
ally reveal leukopenia due to lymphopenia and neutrophilia 
(Sykes, 2014b). Concurrent pulmonary infections may lead 
to the onset of respiratory distress.
1.9.5 Diagnosis
Presumptive diagnosis for CPV infection is made from 
the history, signalment, and clinical signs. On observation 
of clinical signs, a serological test is used to detect IgM 
 antibodies against CPV (Fig. 14). ELISA kits are available 
to detect CPV in the feces of puppies, but are only reliable 
within the first 7  days of infection and are less sensitive. 
More sensitive methods of detecting CPV antigen in feces 
include viral isolation, electron microscopy, latex aggluti -
nation, fecal hemagglutination, immunochromatography, 
PCR, and counterimmuno-electrophoresis ( Schmitz et al., 
2009; Sharma et al., 2018). RT-PCR is more sensitive than 
conventional PCR (Segev et al., 2022).
Transmission
Cycle
Shedding
of CPV by
Carrier &
surviving
dogs
Manifest
a/g415on of
Clinical
signs
Replica/g415on
ofCPV in
intes/g415nal
epithelial
cells
Oronasl
transmissi
on to
Suscep/g415bl
ed ogs
Death
FIG. 12 Transmission cycle of canine parvovirus. (AZPetVet.)

544 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
1.9.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no treatment protocol for CPV infection; hence, 
therapy is mostly supportive and symptomatic. Due to differ-
ences in variants, co-infection, and recombination, there is no 
specific approach to the control of CPV infection. Generally, 
management of CPV cases should involve admission, fluid 
therapy, administration of antimicrobials, analgesics, anti-
emetics, anthelmintics, and enteral nutritional support. It is 
essential to isolate infected dogs. The CPV strain and variant 
used for the manufacture of vaccines do not predispose the 
vaccine to failure. Although the use of killed or live attenuated 
vaccine in puppies should be influenced by age at the time 
of vaccination ( Altman et  al., 2017 ). Inadequate vaccina -
tion, poor vaccine guidelines compliance (Table 3), and poor 
management system of the kennel are predisposing factors 
to CPV vaccine failure and infection (Ogbu et al., 2021). It 
is necessary to monitor MDA considering their interference 
could lead to vaccine failure. In an endemic area,  veterinarians 
A B 
FIG. 13 Hemorrhagic diarrhea (A) and mucoid diarrhea (B) during canine parvovirus infection.
FIG. 14 Different diagnostic methods to confirm and monitor canine parvovirus.

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  545
recommend last puppy vaccination should be earlier than the 
vaccination schedule guideline. The manipulation of the vac-
cination interval against the manufacturer guidelines is also a 
risk factor (Kelman et al., 2020). Dog owners and veterinar-
ians shoulder follow the recommended vaccination guidelines 
by professional bodies within a particular location.
1.10 Canine bocaparvovirus
This is a virus of carnivores that causes hemorrhagic enteri-
tis in dogs.
1.10.1 Etiology
There are six carnivore bocaparvoviruses (CBPV) desig -
nated as 1–6, but only CBPV-1, CBPV-2, and CBPV-3 have 
been reported in dogs (Piewbang et al., 2018).
1.10.2 Epidemiology
CBPV was previously not considered a causative agent of 
disease in dogs, but it has been identified to cause enteritis, 
respiratory disease, and hepatitis in dogs especially pup -
pies (Choi et al., 2016 ). CBPV-1 and 2 have been reported 
in shelter dogs in Italy, Canada, Turkey ( Isidan and Turan, 
2021), and Brazil (Bodewes et al., 2014).
1.10.3 Transmission
CBPV is transmitted via the fecal-oral route in dogs and 
also through the transplacental route.
1.10.4 Clinical manifestation
CBPV-1 infections are mostly subclinical but can be fatal in 
puppies and geriatric dogs where it causes intestinal, respira-
tory, and reproductive disorders. It manifests during immuno-
suppression with signs like diarrhea, dyspnea, and anorexia 
(Kapoor et al., 2012). CBPV-2 is associated with a respiratory 
disease where it causes dyspnea and interstitial pneumonia, and 
also sometimes presents with enteritis (Bodewes et al., 2014). 
CBPV-3 has an affinity for liver tissues and is thus associated 
with hepatitis occurring as a co-infection (Li et al., 2013).
1.10.5 Diagnosis
A serological test is used to screen out mild and subclini -
cal cases. Other methods of detection include liquid-phase 
 immune-electron microscopy, immunohistochemistry, specific 
PCR, and random PCR in combination with next-generation 
sequencing of the intestinal sample (Bodewes et al., 2014).
1.10.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
Canine bocaparvovirus infection is mostly subclinical in 
dogs but has a high rate of co-infection with enteric viruses 
such as CPV-2, canine coronavirus, and circovirus. The 
treatment is supportive and symptomatic as in other enteric 
viruses. Canine bocaparvovirus should be considered when 
puppies suddenly die with respiratory signs or enteric dis -
ease or with heart failure.
1.11 Louping illness
Louping illness is an acute tick-borne viral disease that 
causes encephalitis in sheep and other animal species in -
cluding dogs.
1.11.1 Etiology
Louping illness in dogs is caused by the Louping-ill virus 
(LIV) which is a single-stranded RNA virus belonging to 
the family Flaviviridae and genus Flavivirus. The strain as-
sociated with sheep is responsible for the disease in dogs 
(Dagleish et al., 2018).
1.11.2 Epidemiology
LIV is primarily a disease of sheep that is composed of 
multiple subtypes that tend to cluster geographically around 
Europe, especially in the United Kingdom, Ireland, Spain, 
Turkey, Scandinavia, and Russia ( Clark et al., 2020 ). LIV 
infects livestock, mammals, some avian species, and even 
humans. It has been reported in dogs, due to the interaction 
between dogs and ticks (Abdullah et al., 2016).
1.11.3 Transmission
LIV is transmitted to dogs by the sheep tick ( Ixodes rici-
nus) (Fig. 15). LIV infects so many animal species, but the 
TABLE 3 A vaccination guideline for prevention against 
CPV and other diseases of dogs.
Age of dog
Recommended 
vaccine Optional
6–8 weeks Canine Distemper, 
Hepatitis, Parainfluenza, 
Canine Parvovirus
Bordetella
10–12 weeks Canine Distemper, 
Hepatitis, Parainfluenza, 
Canine Parvovirus
Bordetella, 
Leptospira, 
Coronavirus, 
Lyme disease
14–16 weeks Canine Distemper, 
Hepatitis, Parainfluenza, 
Canine Parvovirus, Rabies
Bordetella, 
Leptospira, Lyme 
disease
12–24 weeks Rabies None
Annually Rabies, Canine 
Distemper, Hepatitis, 
Parainfluenza, Canine 
Parvovirus
Bordetella, 
Leptospira, 
Coronavirus, 
Lyme disease
Every 3 years Canine Distemper, 
Hepatitis, Parainfluenza, 
Canine Parvovirus
None

546 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
disease is subclinical in wildlife which serve as reservoir. 
Dogs also aid to carry infected ticks from the endemic to 
the nonendemic area, contributing to the zoonotic cycle of 
the disease.
1.11.4 Clinical manifestation
LIV has an affinity for the nervous system, clinical signs 
include fever, ataxia, trembling, salivation, coma, and death 
when there is encephalitis.
1.11.5 Diagnosis
LIV is monitored in dogs using the serological test. 
Definitive diagnosis is through viral isolation, RT-PCR, and 
nested PCR are used through RNA extraction from brain 
tissue or infected blood.
1.11.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no available treatment for LIV infection after the 
manifestation of clinical signs, but supportive therapy is 
through sedation of the animal, despite the prognosis is 
mostly guarded. Considering LIV is primarily a disease of 
sheep, preventive measures involve tick control, avoidance 
of tick-infested areas during outdoor activities, vaccination 
of sheep, and possible vaccination of shepherd and hunting 
dogs (Dagleish et al., 2018 ). Action needed to prevent the 
emergence of LIV in the nonendemic area should include 
the availability of diagnostic tools, good animal care, and 
monitoring and surveillance of LIV among imported dogs 
(Chomel, 2011).
1.12 Pseudorabies
Pseudorabies is a fatal and highly contagious disease in pigs 
but can cause disease in dogs and other domestic animals. 
Other names for Pseudorabies include Aujeszky’s disease, 
infectious bulbar, and mad itch.
1.12.1 Etiology
Pseudorabies is caused by Porcine herpesvirus 1 an envel -
oped, DNA virus, double-stranded, and linear belonging to 
the family Herpesviridae, subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae 
(Fig. 16).
FIG.  15 A sheep tick ( Ixodes ricinus ) responsible for the Louping ill 
 virus transmission.
FIG. 16 Schematic diagram of Pseudorabies virus.

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  547
1.12.2 Epidemiology
Pseudorabies is a WOAH-listed notifiable disease that 
causes diseases in mammals except pigs which happen to 
be the natural host. There is a global occurrence of pseudo-
rabies in the pig industry, where it causes 100% mortality in 
pigs less than 2 weeks of age. It usually infects dogs around 
pig farms and dogs that travel in packs. In North America, 
the swine industry is free from pseudorabies, but dogs get 
infected from contact with the feral population ( Pedersen 
et al., 2018).
1.12.3 Transmission
Pseudorabies virus is transmitted through the fecal-oral 
route and via droplets primarily in pigs. Dogs are also in -
fected through the ingestion of raw infected pork meat and 
feral meat.
1.12.4 Clinical manifestation
Pseudorabies virus replicates in the tonsils, nasal and pha -
ryngeal tissues, then invades the lymph nodes, spleen, and 
brain where they continue to replicate. In dogs, these inva -
sion leads to clinical signs like fever, excessive salivation, 
dyspnea, pruritis (mad itch), seizures, erratic behavior, hy -
peresthesia, paralysis, and sudden death. The prognosis is 
guarded as infected dogs die within 2–3 days postinfection 
(Abbate et al., 2021).
1.12.5 Diagnosis
Diagnosis of Pseudorabies in dogs begins with history and 
signalment on possible exposure to pigs, swine feral, inges-
tion of raw meat, and recent exposure to farm. Serological 
methods such as ELISA, immunodiffusion, and viral neu -
tralization are usually used to screen the pig population. 
Definitive diagnosis is done through histopathology, viral 
isolation, direct fluorescent antibody examination, and PCR 
techniques.
1.12.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no treatment for pseudorabies in dogs and other an-
imals, except for pigs that survive the infection and become 
latent carriers. The classic and atypical PrV infection usu -
ally results in the death of the dog. Protective precautions 
should be used when handling suspected cases and tissues. 
The disease can be prevented by avoiding exposure to pigs, 
pig farms, swine feral, avoid ingestion of raw pork and rats. 
There should be a surveillance system for PrV infection in 
wildlife in the nonendemic region to monitor possible spill-
over into domestic animals (Abbate et al., 2021).
1.13 Rabies
Rabies is a viral zoonotic disease that causes progressive 
and deadly inflammation of the brain and spinal cord.
1.13.1 Etiology
Rabies virus is a bullet-shaped ( Fig.  17), negative-sense, 
 single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the genus Lyssavirus, 
family Rhadoviridae, and order Mononegavirales (Rupprecht 
et al., 2017).
1.13.2 Epidemiology
Rabies virus occurs globally and is endemic in developing 
countries, tropical, subtropical, and temperate regions of 
Africa, Asia, the Americas, and Australia. The rabies virus 
infects all warm-blooded animals, but there is specie spe -
cific geographic distribution of variants among terrestrial 
carnivores and bats (Table 4) (Real and Childs, 2006).
FIG. 17 Schematic diagram showing the bullet shape of the Rabies virus and some important components.

548 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
1.13.3 Transmission
Rabies virus is transmitted mostly through the saliva of 
rabid animals making contact with broken skin or mucous 
membranes via a bite, lick, or scratch. Other uncommon 
means of transmission include the transplant of infected or-
gans, and the consumption of infected meat into the gastro-
intestinal tract with abrasions (Fisher et al., 2018).
1.13.4 Clinical manifestation
Upon infection, the virus moves from point of entry and 
along neurons to the spinal cord and brain where they rep -
licate leading to the manifestation of symptoms. The time 
needed for the manifestation depends on the incubation pe-
riod which ranges from 2  weeks to 6  years due to the dis -
tance between the site of infection to the brain. Generally, 
initial signs are fever, tingling, burning, and prickling sen -
sation at the injection site. From the CNS, clinical symp -
toms are presented in two forms: furious form (anterior 
horn cell dysfunction) and paralytic form (peripheral nerve 
dysfunction). Signs of the furious form include hyperactiv-
ity, hydrophobia, aerophobia, and excitable behavior. Death 
occurs after a few days due to cardio-respiratory arrest. 
The paralytic form manifests with less excitability, gradual 
muscle paralysis around the inoculation site, and the devel-
opment of a coma, leading to death.
1.13.5 Diagnosis
Diagnosis begins with the history and signalment of the 
dog, then clinical signs such as phobic spasms, paralysis, 
and excitation. However, these are not enough to make a 
definitive diagnosis. Serological tests for the detection of 
rabies in serum and cerebrospinal fluids include ELISA, 
RFFIT, and FA VN. PCR and sequence-based amplification 
are used to detect rabies in saliva, tears, CSF, urine, and 
skin biopsies. At postmortem, fluorescent antibody testing 
of brain tissue and viral isolation of cell culture are used for 
confirmatory diagnosis.
1.13.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no treatment for rabies virus infection in dogs, 
but it is a top-priority reportable disease. It is a zoonotic 
disease and is preventable with vaccination. Canine rabies 
vaccination of dogs is the lowest cost and highest impact -
ful investment in vaccine-preventable infectious diseases. 
Lyssaviruses circulation in bats which are reservoirs has 
served as a major challenge in causing spillage to other 
animals.
1.14 Canine distemper
Canine distemper is a highly contagious viral disease that 
causes multisystemic infection in different species of carni-
vores, especially dogs.
1.14.1 Etiology
Canine distemper virus (CDV) is a single-stranded, non-
segmented, negative-sense RNA virus belonging to the fam-
ily Paramyxoviridae, and genus morbiliviru. Using analysis 
of the level of amino acid diversity within and between phy-
logenetic clusters of the Hemagglutinin (H) gene, different 
geographic lineages of CDV have been identified. Presently, 
the eight identified lineages are America 1, America 2, Asia 
1, Asia 2, Europe 1, Europe 2 (Europe-wildlife), Europe 3 
(Arctic-like), and South Africa.
1.14.2 Epidemiology
CDV is a globally distributed disease with incidence still 
on the increase worldwide despite the massive use of vac -
cination among the dog population. There is a variation of 
circulating strains of CDV in the world due to major genetic 
variability of the H gene ( Panzera et al., 2012 ). Pantropic 
canine distemper has been detected in various wild canids 
such as wolves, raccoons, pandas, bears, foxes, minks, civ-
ets, hyenas, and large felids like lions and tigers ( Beineke 
et al., 2015).
1.14.3 Transmission
CDV is transmitted through direct contact with infected 
blood, urine, saliva, or respiratory droplets, and contact with 
contaminated fomites. Droplet transmission is common due 
to frequent coughing and sneezing of an infected dog, hence 
making CDV common during cold weather conditions. This 
is also aided by the resistance of CDV to cold. There has 
been transmission to noncarnivore species and nonhuman 
TABLE 4 The different variants of the rabies virus, their 
host, and geographical distribution.
Rabies virus 
variants Source
Geographical 
distribution
Rabies virus Dog, fox, raccoon, 
bats
Widespread
Mokola Dogs, cats, shrews Africa
Lagos bat virus Bats, cats Africa
Duvenhage Insectivorous bats Africa
Australian bat 
lyssavirus
Fruit bats, 
insectivorous bats
Australia, 
Philippines
European bat 
lyssavirus types 1 
and 2
Insectivorous bats Netherlands, 
France, Denmark, 
United Kingdom, 
Spain, Ukraine, 
Germany, Russian, 
Poland, Switzerland

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  549
primates, thus indicating the tendency of CDV to mutate 
and cross-species barriers (Beineke et al., 2015).
1.14.4 Clinical manifestation
Canine distemper virus is pantropic (multisystemic) affect-
ing the gastrointestinal, respiratory, skin, immune, and cen-
tral nervous systems (Fig. 18). The symptoms can be mild, 
severe, and even fatal, especially in puppies. Symptoms 
can take up to 14  days to manifest as fever, pain, sneezing, 
coughing, lethargy, dyspnea, nasal and ocular discharges, 
diarrhea, vomiting, inappetence, pneumonia, skin sores, 
and thickening of nose and foot pads. Neurological signs 
are similar to rabies and include head tilt, salivation, pa -
ralysis, paresis, muscle twitching, circling, involuntary eye 
movements, and seizures. These neurological signs can 
sometimes be absent and appear 4 weeks postinfection.
1.14.5 Diagnosis
Serological tests for CDV can be done using ELISA on 
samples such as CSF and peripheral blood. It is usually 
difficult to differentiate between natural infection and vac -
cination response. Viral antigen immunofluorescent assay 
or RT-PCR is used for confirmatory diagnosis from many 
samples such as blood, urine, discharges, and biopsies from 
footpads.
1.14.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no treatment for CDV infection, but supportive 
and symptomatic treatments are rendered. This intervention 
should be immediate and intensive to help the dog recover. 
However, some neurological signs may persist even after 
the recovery of the patient. CDV can be prevented through 
the vaccination of puppies and adult dogs. The puppies 
should be vaccinated at 6  weeks of age, repeated after 3 
or 4 weeks until they are 16  weeks old. Immunity may be 
stable for over 3 years, but the period to repeat vaccination 
depends on the endemicity of CDV in the particular loca -
tion. Dogs unvaccinated should be maintained under strict 
hygiene, sanitation, and a healthy diet and avoid exposure to 
infected dogs or locations. Although vaccination has been 
effective, CDV is still a major burden for dogs, wild ani -
mal populations, and nonhuman primates (Uhl et al., 2019). 
The antigenic variability of CDV , breaking of species barri-
ers, increasing host range, and maintenance among wildlife 
hosts, has been a hindrance to the eradication of the disease.
2 Viral diseases of cats
2.1 Feline herpes virus
The feline herpes virus causes a disease that affects the 
eyes, skin, and upper respiratory system of cats.
2.1.1 Etiology
Feline herpesvirus (FHV-1; felid herpesvirus 1 (FeHV-1)) 
is an enveloped, double-stranded DNA virus that belongs 
to the family Herpesviridae, subfamily Alphaherpesvirinae, 
and genus Varicellovirus. It is closely related to canine 
 herpesvirus-1 and porcine herpesvirus-1. There is only one 
serotype of the virus, and it is relatively homogenous ge -
netically (Gaskell et al., 2007).
FIG. 18 An image showing organs and their likely clinical signs seen in Canine distemper infection.

550 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
2.1.2 Epidemiology
FHV-1 is a main infectious agent of domestic and wild fe -
lines worldwide. It is endemic in most populations, and its 
prevalence depends on the population density of felines in 
such locations (Henzel et al., 2015).
2.1.3 Transmission
FHV-1 is transmitted through direct contact with oral, na -
sal, and ocular secretions from infected cats. A newly in -
fected cat begins to shed and transmit the virus within a day 
postinfection.
2.1.4 Clinical manifestation
FHV-1 infects the upper respiratory tract causing sneezing, 
coughing, fever, and inappetence, followed by ocular and 
nasal discharges, sometimes with excessive drooling and sal-
ivation. Conjunctivitis and corneal ulcer may also result. In se-
vere cases, the skin around the face turns red, swollen, crusty, 
and the occurrence of alopecia (Gould, 2011) (Fig. 19).
2.1.5 Diagnosis
PCR test is reliable for diagnosis but does not differentiate the 
active form from the chronic carrier form of FHV-1. Hence, 
diagnosis with PCR should be aided with clinical signs, phys-
ical examination, history, and signalment of the cat.
2.1.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
Skin defects from FHV-1 are usually treated with the topi -
cal use of nucleoside analogs. Secondary bacterial infec -
tions are kept in check using broad-spectrum antibiotics. 
Cats showing clinical signs should be isolated immediately 
and the space should be sanitized. Avoid overcrowding of 
cats in shelters and their exposure to stressors. Modified live 
 virus vaccines and adjuvanted inactivated virus vaccines are 
 commercially available and are capable of reducing symp -
toms of the disease during an outbreak.
2.2 Feline calicivirus
Feline calicivirus (FCV) is a highly infectious respiratory 
pathogen of domestic cats.
2.2.1 Etiology
Feline calicivirus (FCV) is a single-stranded positive-sense 
RNA virus belonging to the family Caliciviridae, genus 
Vesivirus. FCV mutates easily forming new strains that 
have the capacity to infect vaccinated or recovered cats. The 
strains differ in the severity of the disease that they cause, 
but the majority cause mild disease.
2.2.2 Epidemiology
FCV is persistent and causes sporadic outbreaks globally. 
It has a high prevalence in the cat population, especially in 
multicat households ( Coyne et al., 2006 ). The high preva -
lence may also be a result of the high resistance of FCV in 
the environment ( Najafi et  al., 2014) and the presence of 
several strains among domestic and wild cats.
2.2.3 Transmission
FCV is transmitted via direct contact with infected oral, 
 nasal, and ocular secretions.
2.2.4 Clinical manifestation
FCV can manifest as mild or severe respiratory infection 
and oral disease. Mild signs include sneezing, coughing, 
fever, nasal congestion, and secretions from the nose and 
eyes. In severe cases, there is swelling and ulceration of the 
tongue and mouth, lethargy, lameness, and inappetence.
2.2.5 Diagnosis
Diagnosis is by viral isolation or RT-PCR.
2.2.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
No specific treatment protocol, but supportive therapy in -
volves fluid therapy, broad-spectrum antibiotics, mucolytic 
agents, and tender loving care. Vaccination is recommended 
twice at 9 and 12  weeks of age, followed by an annual 
booster. FCV is stable in the environment and resistant to 
many disinfectants. Hence, vaccinated and recovered cats 
are not protected for life due to strain variability.
2.3 Feline leukemia virus
2.3.1 Etiology
Feline leukemia virus (FeLV) is an enveloped RNA vi -
rus belonging to the family Retroviridae, subfamily 
Orthoretrovirinae, and genus Gammaretrovirus. FeLV has 
three subtypes designated FeLV-A, FeLV-B, and FeLV-C.
FIG. 19 A red, swollen, crusty, and alopecic face of cat infected by feline 
herpesvirus 1. (From Gould, D., 2011. Clinical practice. J. Feline Med. 
Surg. 13, 333–346. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfms.2011.03.010.)

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  551
2.3.2 Epidemiology
FeLV occurs worldwide as a major cause of death in do -
mestic cats. It also occurs among wild felids. There is a de-
crease in the prevalence for some decades, due to extensive 
surveillance and vaccination.
2.3.3 Transmission
FeLV is transmitted through long exposure to salivary se -
cretions. Other means of transmission include bite, trans -
placental, through milk, mechanically by fleas, and through 
blood transfusion.
2.3.4 Clinical manifestation
Clinical signs of FeLV include lethargy, paleness, stoma -
titis, fever, leukemia, and lymphoma, leading to immune 
suppression bone marrow disorders and hematopoietic neo-
plasia (Fig. 20).
2.3.5 Diagnosis
Serological tests using ELISA kits are used to screen for 
FeLV , where it detects the presence of free FeLV particles 
(FeLV P27) which are present in the blood at the early and 
late stages of infection. Indirect immunofluorescent anti -
body assay (IFA) test and PCR are used for confirmation 
of the infection. Other nonclinical testing includes qPCR, 
qRT-PCR, and anti-FeLV Nab ( Westman et  al., 2019 ). 
Diagnosing FeLV infection can be complicated as a result 
of varying infection outcomes over a period of time due 
to fluctuations in viremia and the host’s immune system 
(Hofmann-Lehmann and Hartmann, 2020).
2.3.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no specific treatment against FeLV infection, 
but supportive treatments are given against second -
ary bacterial infection and anemia. Cats should be kept 
indoors to avoid exposure to FeLV-infected cats. Cats 
in shelters should be screened to isolate infected cats. 
There should be continuous surveys and vaccination 
against FeLV , especially in locations with a high popula -
tion of cats. Despite the vaccination offers inadequate 
protection, cat owners should be encouraged to vacci -
nate against FeLV .
2.4 Feline distemper/feline panleukemia
Feline panleukopenia/feline distemper/feline parvovirus is 
a highly contagious and infectious disease in cats especially 
kittens and unvaccinated cats which can be mild, severe, 
and even fatal.
2.4.1 Etiology
Feline panleukopenia virus (FPV) is a small, single-
stranded, nonenveloped, linear DNA virus belonging to the 
family Parvoviridae, subfamily Densovirinae, and genus 
Protoparvovirus. FPV is mostly (95%) caused by feline par-
vovirus (FPV) and sometimes (5%) by canine parvovirus 
(CPV) variants, specifically CPV-2a, b, and c (Barrs, 2019).
2.4.2 Epidemiology
Feline panleukopenia occurs worldwide in cats, especially 
in unvaccinated and incompletely vaccinated kittens with a 
mortality rate of 50%–90% (Porporato et al., 2018).
2.4.3 Transmission
FPV is transmitted by the fecal-oral route and by di -
rect contact with the environment or fomites contami -
nated with infected cats’ saliva, urine, feces, and vomit. 
Transplacental and breast milk transmission occur be -
tween queen and kitten. Infected cats can shed the virus 
for about 2 days, but the virus can survive in the environ -
ment for several years.
FIG. 20 Some common clinical symptoms of feline leukemia virus.

552 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
2.4.4 Clinical manifestation
FPV invades, replicates, and kills cells of the bone mar -
row, intestines, skin, and developing fetus. The clinical 
signs vary from mild to severe based on the degree of 
invasiveness and symptoms include fever, lethargy, de -
pression, inappetence, diarrhea, vomiting, dehydration, 
emaciation, abdominal pain, rough hair coat, bruised 
skin, and gum ( Fig. 21 ). It also causes abortion in preg -
nant queens.
2.4.5 Diagnosis
FPV is usually screened using an ELISA test and confirmed 
by viral isolation and PCR (Jacobson et al., 2021). However, 
cats with a history of exposure and the presence of leuko -
penia and anemia are usually considered during tentative 
diagnosis.
2.4.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no specific treatment for FPV , but supportive and 
symptomatic therapies are helpful. There is an effective 
vaccine against FPV which can be given once or twice, 2 
or 4 weeks apart. Due to the persistence of FPV in the en -
vironment, equipment and facilities within a contaminated 
shelter should be carefully disinfected or replaced.
2.5 Feline coronavirus
Feline coronaviruses (FCoV) cause two major diseases in 
cats, feline enteric coronavirus (FECV) and feline infec -
tious peritonitis virus (FIPV). FECV infection is mostly 
asymptomatic or mild and restricted to the intestine, while 
FIPV is fatal causing infectious peritonitis (Fig. 22).
2.5.1 Etiology
FECV is a single-stranded, enveloped, positive-sense RNA 
virus ( Fig.  23) belonging to Coronaviridae, subfamily 
Orthocoronavirinae, genera; Alphacoronavirus, and spe -
cies, Alphacoronavirus-1 ( dos Santos et  al., 2020 ). There 
are two serotypes of FCoV: serotype I and II. FIPV devel -
ops from the mutation of a virulent form of FECV in in -
fected domestic cats (Tekes and Thiel, 2016).
2.5.2 Epidemiology
FECV and FIPV occur globally in domestic cats and some 
wild Felidae especially those of young age. The prevalence of 
FCoV is high among the cat population globally, but there is a 
variable geographical distribution of serotypes I and II. FIP is 
a major cause of death in cats; however, morbidity is low due 
to the need for mutation of virulent FCoV to occur. The epi-
demiology of FIP depends on healthy carriers of FCoV by do-
mestic cats, their constant shedding of the virus, and persistent 
infection of the colon and other organs (Kipar et al., 2010).
2.5.3 Transmission
Feline coronavirus (FCoV) is naturally transmitted through 
the fecal-oral route.
2.5.4 Clinical manifestation
FECV invades the cat via the oral route, infecting and rep -
licating in the enterocytes, restricted to the intestinal tract. 
It manifests as vomiting, diarrhea, and self-limiting gastro-
enteritis. In the case of FIP, virulent FCoV invades the vil -
lous cells of the intestine, mutates, replicates, and spreads 
through monocyte-associated cells leading to viremia, and 
A 
B 
FIG. 21 Diarrhea (A) and vomiting (B) are common signs of feline distemper.

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  553
compromising the immune cells ( Desmarets et al., 2016 ). 
Clinical signs include inappetence, fever, dyspnea, ema -
ciation, distended abdomen, abdominal edema, depression, 
seizures, tremors, etc. (Sweet et al., 2022) (Fig. 24).
2.5.5 Diagnosis
FECV and FIPV vary in virulence but are difficult to dis -
tinguish by regular diagnostic methods. Several diagnostic 
procedures are needed to differentiate FCoV . It should in -
volve consideration of history, signalment, clinical signs, 
pathological abnormalities, and RT-PCR ( Felten and 
Hartmann, 2019).
2.5.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There are no approved treatments for FCoV; however, sev-
eral therapeutic compounds have been explored and devel -
oped. In recent years, two novel molecules (GS-441524 
and GC376) have raised hopes given the encouraging re -
sults, but some concerns about the use of these molecules 
persist (Delaplace et al., 2021 ). Avoid sharing feeders and 
drinkers at kitten shelters. A commercially available intra -
nasal  temperature-sensitive vaccine is effective when ad -
ministered at 16 weeks of age and the second dose is given 
3 weeks later. However, most kittens are already infected 
before 16  weeks of age, reducing the vaccine’s efficacy 
(Addie, 1998). Cat breeders should include FCoV in their 
annual screening test for diseases such as FeLV , FIV , etc. 
Newly purchased cats should be quarantined and screened 
for FCoV before adding it to the shelter.
2.6 Feline immunodeficiency virus
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is a virus of domestic 
cats that attacks the immune system, making the cats sus -
ceptibility to infections.
2.6.1 Etiology
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is an enveloped 
single-stranded RNA virus belonging to the Retroviridae 
family, genus lentivirus, with seven phylogenetic subtypes 
designated as A–F and U-NZenv.
2.6.2 Epidemiology
Feline immunodeficiency virus (FIV) is a disease of domes-
tic cats with worldwide distribution. It is known to infect 
species of Felidae and Hyaenidae. FIV eventually leads to 
feline immunodeficiency disease in domestic cats while the 
pathogenic potential in wild felids is less known. It is com-
mon among cats of middle age between 5 and 10 years old.
2.6.3 Transmission
FIV is transmitted through a deep bite from an infected cat 
due to the presence of the virus in the saliva ( Fig. 25). The 
transmission also occurs between the queen and kitten dur-
ing pregnancy, delivery, and nursing. Aggressive male and 
FIG. 22 Feline Coronavirus shed by asymptomatic and mildly infected cats.
FIG. 23 A schematic structure of Feline Coronavirus.

554 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
FIG. 24 Systems affected by feline enteric coronavirus and feline infectious peritonitis.
FIG. 25 Transmission cycle of feline immunodeficiency virus. (From Sweet, A.N., André, N.M., Stout, A.E., Licitra, B.N., Whittaker, G.R., 2022. Clinical 
and molecular relationships between COVID-19 and feline infectious peritonitis (FIP). Viruses 14 (3) 481. https://doi.org/10.3390/V14030481.)

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  555
outdoor cats are most vulnerable due to fights and injury 
from a territorial dispute.
2.6.4 Clinical manifestation
FIV targets mainly the immune system, making the cat 
susceptible to secondary infections and manifest signs like 
weakness, fever, lethargy, inappetence, salivation, diarrhea, 
lymph node enlargement, abscesses, abortion, stillbirth, con-
junctivitis, leukemia, lymphoma, and behavioral changes. 
Clinical manifestation of FIV occurs in three phases: latent 
infection, feline AIDs, and terminal phase. The latent phase 
has no symptoms and usually lasts for years. Feline AIDs 
occurs when the cat is immunocompromised and suscepti -
ble to secondary infection; hence, the symptoms are related 
to the secondary infection. It occurs years post-infection. 
The terminal phase occurs within 2–3 months, with severe 
infections such as cancer, immune-mediated disease, neu -
rologic disease, etc.
2.6.5 Diagnosis
Diagnosis usually relies on antibody screening by ELISA, 
and confirmation using Western blot. FIV diagnosis can be 
complicated due to increasing travel by cats and the intro -
duction of new FIV isolates not recognized by screening 
assays (Frankenfeld et al., 2019).
2.6.6 Treatment, prevention, and control
There is no treatment for FIV in cats, but efforts are made 
to prolong the latent phase. In the occurrence of symptoms, 
treatments involve medications against secondary infec -
tions, fluid therapy, immune boosters, anti-inflammation, 
nutrient diet, and parasite control. Commercial vaccines 
against FIV are available, and render protection but are not 
completely effective. It also results in false positives when 
testing for FIV antibodies. Other preventive measures in -
clude keeping cats indoors, putting cats on a leash when 
outdoors, and always screening new cats for FIV .

556 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats

Common viral diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 36  557

558 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats

559

Chapter 37
Zoonotic diseases of dogs and cats
Dogs and cats play an astonishing range of roles in the hu­
man society. Their roles in society are expanding, whether 
as companions or assuming special roles for assistance or 
therapy by volunteers or human health professionals. From 
pets to sporting companions to service dogs, canines add  
a measurable degree of quality to the world of the humans 
they share their lives with while choosing cats as companion 
may help in reducing stress and anxiety and keep the house 
pest free. Also cats are quiet and required low maintenance. 
In spite of all these roles, they are also responsible for trans­
mitting several zoonotic diseases to the human beings, and  
some of them are even life threatening. Zoonosis is an infec­
tious disease that has jumped from a nonhuman animal to  
humans. Zoonotic pathogens may be bacterial, viral, or para­
sitic, or may involve unconventional agents and can spread  
to humans through direct contact or through food, water,  
or the environment. They represent a major public health 
problem around the world due to our close relationship 
with animals in agriculture, as companions and in the natu­
ral environment (WHO). The diseases associated with dogs  
include rabies, capnocytophagosis, ringworm and external  
parasites, tularemia, brucellosis, leptospirosis, campylobac­
terosis, salmonellosis, cryptosporidiosis, giardiasis, infec­
tions with pathogenic E. coli, echinococcosis, cutaneous and  
visceral larval migrans, yersiniosis, mange, and MRSA. The  
zoonotic diseases associated with cats include rabies, capno­
cytophagosis, pasteurellosis, cat scratch disease, ringworm, 
sporotrichosis, tularemia, plague, Q fever, and external 
parasites, campylobacterosis, salmonellosis, infections with  
pathogenic E. coli , cryptosporidiosis, giardiasis, toxoplas­
mosis, and MRSA. Transmission of zoonotic diseases from 
pet animals is primarily by direct contact, ingestion, indirect 
contact with insect vectors and contaminated inanimate ob­
jects, or inhalation of aerosolized materials.
1 Viral diseases
1.1 Rabies
Rabies is a severe viral disease that affects the central 
nervous system (CNS) of mammals. Once the clinical 
sign appears, survival is very rare in animals as well as in 
humans. Rabies virus is a neurotropic virus in the genus 
Lyssavirus, family Rhabdoviridae. Closely related viruses, 
called rabies­related lyssaviruses or nonrabies lyssaviruses, 
are maintained in bats and can cause illnesses identical to 
rabies. Rabies is most often transmitted from animal to 
animal in a bite. It can also be acquired by other forms of 
contact with infectious saliva or neurological tissues, typi ­
cally through mucous membranes or breaks in the skin. All 
species of mammals can probably contract rabies, but only 
a limited number also act as reservoir hosts. Reservoir hosts 
are mostly members of the families Canidae (dogs, jackals, 
coyotes, wolves, foxes, raccoon dogs), Mustelidae (various 
skunks, ferret badgers), Viverridae (mongooses, genets), 
and Procyonidae (raccoons), and the order Chiroptera 
(bats). Progressive paralysis and abrupt behavioral changes 
are frequent in cats with rabies. Additionally, they might be 
agitated, pant, or they might even attack other animals, hu ­
mans, or things. Usually, rabies symptoms in animals are 
followed by death within a few days. People can develop 
rabies symptoms days to months after exposure (Fig. 1).
1.1.1 Zoonotic importance
Rabies, caused by a virus, is almost invariably fatal in hu ­
mans. All variants of rabies virus are thought to be zoonotic. 
Clinical cases have also been caused by Duvenhage virus, 
EBLV 1, EBLV 2, Australian bat lyssavirus, Mokola virus, 
and Irkut virus. Humans are probably susceptible to other 
rabies­related lyssaviruses as well. Vaccines can protect 
pets and livestock, as well as people exposed to these ani ­
mals, and human illness can be prevented by administering 
antibodies and a series of vaccinations, provided exposure 
is recognized before the symptoms appear. However, people 
in impoverished countries do not always have access to ef ­
fective postexposure prophylaxis. Within 14 days of the sus­
pected dog bite, postexposure treatment with repeated doses 
of human rabies immunoglobulin (HRIG) can prevent the 
disease. The likelihood of contracting rabies can be drasti ­
cally decreased by washing the wound with water and liq ­
uid soap (Lucas et al., 2007).

560 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
1.2 Noroviruses
Norovirus infection is a major cause of endemic and epidemic 
acute gastroenteritis. These viruses have been classified into 
seven genogroups on the basis of the major capsid protein, 
VP1. Noroviruses GI, GII, and GIV can infect humans, 
GII pigs, GIII and GV ruminants and mice, and GVI and 
GVII dogs. A heterogeneous single­strand RNA virus in the 
Caliciviridae family, noroviruses cause contagious diseases.
1.2.1 Zoonotic importance
Human sporadic and epidemic gastroenteritis is primarily 
brought on by noroviruses ( Summa et al., 2012 ). Humans 
of any age can be impacted by this virus. The virus can 
be discovered in the digestive system, and as a result, can 
be found in the feces or diarrhea of the affected canines. 
Humans can contract it from tainted food or water, and the 
infection spreads quickly among people due to fecal ­oral 
route. Patients with acute gastroenteritis should think about 
receiving serum treatment ( Wolf et al., 2009 ). In humans, 
antibodies against canine norovirus were also reported in 
veterinarians, who experienced high risk.
2 Fungal diseases
Zoonotic fungal diseases constitute social and occupational 
hazards for humans that are exposed to and closely interact 
with infected animals. Contact with fungus­contaminated en­
vironments as well as objects of animal rearing and restraint is 
considered important in natural dissemination of these diseases.
2.1 Dermatophytosis
Dermatophytosis is an integumentary fungal disease and 
is of public health and economic significance. It is an im ­
portant occupational mycozoonoses of dairymen, animal 
handlers, livestock farmers, pet owners, veterinarians, etc. 
(Ruben, 2010).
It is caused by a group of highly specialized pathogenic 
fungi collectively referred to as “dermatophytes,” which are 
the most common agents of superficial mycoses in animals 
and humans, and are thus recognized as a public health men­
ace worldwide. This group of closely related fungi compris­
ing 40 identified species in the dermatophytic genera that 
include Microsporum, Trichophyton, and Epidermophyton 
cause infection of the stratum corneum of the epidermis and 
keratinized tissues such as skin, hair, and nails of humans 
and animals (Popoola et al., 2006).
Majority of zoonotic dermatophytes are caused by four 
species: Microsporum canis (usually derived from pet ani ­
mals, particularly cats and dogs), Trichophyton verrucosum 
(usually derived from cattle), Arthroderma vanbreuseghe ­
mii (usually derived from cats and dogs), and Arthroderma 
benhamiae (usually derived from guinea­pigs).
Ecologically, dermatophytes are classified as zoophilic, 
anthropophilic, or geophilic depending on their major res ­
ervoir in nature (animals, humans and soil, respectively). 
Zoophilic dermatophytes may result in zoonoses when hu ­
mans are exposed to these organisms.
2.1.1 Zoonotic importance
In case of human, infection results most often from direct 
contact with an infected animal, but may also be acquired 
indirectly through contact with a contaminated environment, 
such as fungus­bearing hair and scales from infected animals. 
The most common agents of infection identified were the 
zoophilic species: Microsporum canis, Trichophyton menta-
grophytes, and T. verrucosum. Usually, close interactions of 
humans with domestic animals through nomadic lifestyle, 
animal farming, domestic livestock keeping or pet owner ­
ship promote the prevalence of dermatophytic infections.
3 Parasitic diseases
Parasites are responsible for some of the most important 
and well­recognized zoonotic infectious diseases transmit ­
ted from companion animals to man globally.
Virus enters tissue from
saliva of bitting animal
Replicate in musclesa tt he
site of bite
Binds to nicotinic receptors
at neuromuscular junction
Travels within axons in
perpheral nerves through
axonal transport
Replicates in dorsal root
ganglion and travels up
spinanal cord to brain
Reaches brain andc auses
fatal encephalitis
Travels from brain vian erves
to other tissues such as eyes,
kidneys, salivary glandse tc
FIG. 1 Sequential steps in the pathogenesis of rabies after an animal bite 
inoculation of rabies virus.

Zoonotic diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 37  561
3.1 Toxoplasmosis
3.1.1 Etiology
Toxoplasma gondii is a tissue cyst ­forming coccidium. In 
most cases, infection is subclinical, but devastating disease 
can occur ( Cenci­Goga et  al., 2011 ). The virulence of 
T. gondii  strains is highly variable and dependent on the 
genotype of the parasite.
3.1.2 Hosts and life cycle
Cats are the definitive hosts for T. gondii, but all warm ­
blooded vertebrates including man may serve as intermedi­
ate hosts and potentially be infected by the stage bradyzoites 
in meat, by sporulated oocysts or by intrauterine tachyzoites 
(Elmore et al., 2010 ). Transmission mainly occurs through 
a sexual cycle in the definitive host and asexually, through 
carnivorous behavior and by vertical transmission. The 
asexual phase of T. gondii development takes place in vari­
ous tissues of herbivorous or omnivorous intermediate hosts 
and is linked to a sexual phase of development in the intes­
tine of felids, the definitive hosts. The parasite can invade 
the gut, become systemic, and localize in vital organs such 
as muscle and the nervous system.
3.1.3 Zoonotic importance
In case of humans, the main sources of infections are ac ­
quired from eating undercooked or raw meat, such as pork 
and lamb. However, the prevalence of T. gondii infection 
in human populations that do not consume meat or eat it 
well­cooked suggests that the acquisition of infection from 
the environment, via oocysts in soil, water or on uncooked 
vegetables, may also play an important role in transmission. 
Some of the facts suggest that only a small proportion of 
infected people acquire infection congenitally (Lindsay and 
Dubey, 2011). In case of domestic cats, latent infections 
with T. gondii  are common throughout the world. After 
primary infection, cats spread Toxoplasma oocysts in their 
feces within 3–10 days and shedding continues for approxi­
mately 7–21 days (median 8  days), with up to hundreds of 
millions of oocysts shed in the feces of a single infected cat 
(Dubey, 2001). Afterward, the direct risk for cat owners is 
limited. It is said that T. gondii infects up to a third of the 
human population of the world.
3.1.4 Diagnosis
Confirmatory diagnosis can be done by the isolation of the 
parasite from various tissues, detection of specific DNA 
by polymerase chain reaction (PCR) or by carrying out 
serological tests. Currently, routine diagnosis of toxoplas ­
mosis relies mainly on the use of serological assays that 
are available for both man and animals such as the Sabin ­
Feldman dye test, indirect fluorescent antibody test (IFAT), 
enzyme­linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) or various 
 agglutination tests. Also over the past two decades, PCR ­
based tests have been developed to detect parasite DNA in 
human and animal tissues.
3.1.5 Prevention and control
Control measures should be aimed at the prevention of oo ­
cyst shedding in order to reduce infection of people with 
T. gondii  ( Tenter et  al., 2000 ). The risk for exposure to 
T. gondii parasites is greatest in cats that prey on wildlife 
and live outdoors or in farms. Kittens are very susceptible 
to infection and shed greater quantities of oocysts. Certain 
measures needs to be taken for prevention in case of hu ­
mans such as collecting feces in litter trays for ultimate dis­
posal in rubbish destined for landfills, which are designed 
to prevent waste materials leaking into groundwater. Also 
do not consume undercooked meat or drink contaminated 
groundwater as it may be infected by sporulated oocysts. 
The control of human toxoplasmosis also relies on the 
avoidance of direct or indirect exposure to cat feces. Proper 
fecal handling, litter tray management, removal of feces 
from public areas and yards and hand hygiene are critical. 
Litter trays should be thoroughly cleaned every day so that 
any potential oocysts do not have time to sporulate (i.e., in 
about 48 h) (Dubey et al., 2011). People, particularly those 
vulnerable to infection, such as pregnant women and the 
immunosuppressed, should avoid this task. Similarly, drink­
ing unfiltered surface water or accidental ingestion of soil 
must be avoided.
3.2 Leishmaniosis
3.2.1 Etiology
Leishmaniosis (or leishmaniasis) is a complex of mamma ­
lian diseases caused by diphasic protozoans of the genus 
Leishmania (Kinetoplasta, Trypanosomatidae). The leish ­
maniosis affects man and domestic and wild animals world­
wide. It is endemic in many tropical and subtropical regions 
of the Old and New World.
3.2.2 Hosts and life cycle
In case of leishmaniosis, the most transmission cycles are 
zoonotic, involving reservoir hosts such as rodents, marsu ­
pials, edentates, monkeys, domestic dogs, and wild canids. 
Only a few Leishmania species are strictly anthroponotic 
(i.e., transmitted directly from person to person via sand 
flies). Dogs are the major reservoir for canine and human 
L. infantum infection, in an area that stretches from Portugal 
to China and across South, Central and parts of North 
America, with the exception of Oceania. Main mode of nat­
ural transmission of L. infantum between animals and from 
animals to man occurs usually by the bite of a phlebotomine 
sand fly species (Diptera, Psychodidae, Phlebotominae) 
of the genera Phlebotomus (Old World) and Lutzomyia

562 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
(New  World). Leishmania completes its life cycle in the 
sand fly, which harbors the flagellated extracellular pro ­
mastigote form and in a mammal where the intracellular 
amastigote form develops, while blood feeding a female 
sand fly ingests Leishmania and then transmits the infec ­
tive stages (metacyclic promastigotes) during a subsequent 
blood meal. The infective promastigotes inoculated by the 
sand fly are phagocytosed in the mammalian host by macro­
phages and other phagocytic cells, in which they transform 
to amastigotes. Proven modes of nonsand fly transmission 
in dogs include infection through transfused blood products 
(Owens et  al., 2011 ) from blood donors that are carriers 
of infection ( Tabar et al., 2008 ), vertical ( Boggiatto et al., 
2011) and venereal transmission (Silva et al., 2009).
3.2.3 Zoonotic importance
Human leishmaniosis, caused by several species of 
Leishmania, comprises a heterogeneous group of diseases. 
These include visceral leishmaniosis (VL), which involves 
internal organs and is fatal if untreated, and the cutaneous 
(CL) and mucocutaneous forms, which affect the skin or 
mucocutaneous junctions and may heal spontaneously, 
leaving disfiguring scars ( Murray et  al., 2005 ). The main 
predisposing factors or risk factors for human infection in ­
clude age, poor socioeconomic conditions, malnutrition and 
immunosuppressive conditions (Alvar et al., 2006).
3.2.4 Diagnosis
For the confirmatory diagnosis, the most common tech ­
niques used for disease detection in man and animals in ­
clude microscopical observation, i.e., cytology, biopsy or 
immunohistochemistry, and serological and molecular 
techniques.
3.2.5 Prevention and control
Control measures mainly include medical treatment, indi ­
vidual use of sand fly repellents in dogs, canine vaccines, 
and immunomodulating drugs. People are commonly 
treated with a short course of amphotericin B (Murray et al., 
2005), while moderately to severely sick dogs are usually 
treated with a combination of a 1 ­month course of meglu ­
mine, antimoniate, or miltefosine and a long ­term course 
of allopurinol. Generally, treatment in dogs leads to a clini­
cal cure and decreased parasite load. However, complete 
parasitological cure in the majority of dogs appears to be 
unlikely (Solano­Gallego et al., 2009).
3.3 Giardiasis
3.3.1 Etiology
There are several species of the intestinal protozoan 
parasites which belongs to the genus Giardia that infect 
 numerous hosts, ranging from mammals to amphibians 
and birds. Currently, six Giardia species are accepted: 
Giardia agilis , Giardia ardeae , Giardia muris , Giardia 
microti, and Giardia psittaci  infecting various species of 
animals, while Giardia duodenalis  infects man and many 
other mammals.
3.3.2 Hosts and life cycle
Giardia is a very common intestinal protozoal parasite of 
dogs, cats, livestock, and wildlife. G. duodenalis  causes 
giardiasis in man and in most mammals. The life cycle of 
Giardia is direct and the infective stage of the parasite, the 
cyst, is immediately infectious when released into the feces. 
When ingested by the host, cysts exist in the duodenum, 
releasing the trophozoites. The latter undergo repeated mi ­
totic division in the gut lumen and form environmentally 
resistant cysts. Cysts pass through the intestine in feces and 
are spread by contaminated water, food and fomites and by 
direct physical contact (Feng and Xiao, 2011). Cysts remain 
infectious for months in cool, damp areas and accumulate 
in the environment.
3.3.3 Zoonotic importance
The zoonotic significance of Giardia infection is not clear. 
Although people share the same G. duodenalis assemblages 
with animals with which they have close contact, such as 
household dogs, it is not known how frequently infection is 
actually acquired from household animal contact or whether 
both people and pets acquire it from a common source, such 
as contaminated water. Undoubtedly, people also commonly 
infect each other. Giardiosis in animals is often subclinical, 
but has been associated with the occurrence of diarrhea and 
illness in puppies and kittens (Thompson, 2004).
3.3.4 Diagnosis
For the identification of cyst and trophozoite stages of 
Giardia infection stool examination can be performed in 
direct fresh stool smears or by flotation for cysts. Rapid 
detection of Giardia antigen can be made using immuno ­
chromatographic kits, by immunofluorescence, ELISA or 
PCR in a suitably equipped parasitology laboratory ( Feng 
and Xiao, 2011).
3.3.5 Prevention and control
The prevention of giardiasis in man is closely associated 
with the provision of clean fresh water and adequate sewage 
systems. Boiling or filtering water from the environment 
before drinking it is essential and removal of infected feces 
from infected animals or people followed by proper disin ­
fection is necessary. Adherence to personal hygiene habits 
such as washing hands and cleaning fresh food is important 
in limiting infection.

Zoonotic diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 37  563
3.4 Echinococcosis
3.4.1 Etiology
The genus Echinococcus includes several species and 
genotypes of zoonotic cestodes (tapeworms) such as 
Echinococcus granulosus , E. multicularis , etc. The adult 
stages of these cestodes occur in the intestines of canids and 
felids without clinical relevance. The larval stages develop 
in tissues of various organs of a variety of mammalian inter­
mediate hosts, including man as aberrant hosts.
3.4.2 Hosts and life cycle
The main source of transmission of E. granulosus is a dog­
sheep cycle in pastoral regions however; other potential 
intermediate hosts can be involved. Wild felines and domes­
tic cats have occasionally been found to harbor intestinal 
stages. Although cats are more likely to be infected with 
E. multilocularis  than dogs, their zoonotic significance is 
estimated to be small, based on the low level of egg excre ­
tion. Dogs, on the other hand, may play a very important 
role in the transmission to man, but they probably do not 
contribute significantly to the contamination of rodent habi­
tats as compared with foxes (Hegglin and Deplazes, 2013). 
By means of defecation, the eggs are typically excreted 
fully developed and infectious (containing an oncosphere 
larva) in the environment. These eggs are found to be highly 
resistant and the E. multilocularis eggs survive in the envi­
ronment for up to 8  months; however, they are sensitive to 
desiccation. Eggs can be dispersed from the deposition sites 
either by being washed away or carried by flies and other 
vectors (Eckert et al., 2011).
3.4.3 Zoonotic importance
There are different ways by which humans are exposed to 
eggs of Echinococcus spp. and the most important sources 
of infection are handling of definitive hosts and oral up of 
contaminated water, food, or soil. The direct exposure to 
these eggs of Echinococcus spp. is influenced by occupa ­
tion and behavior, especially a close human ­animal bond. 
Domestic transmission of E. granulosus eggs from pet, stray 
and working dogs are particularly important in areas with 
inadequate educational standards and veterinary control. 
Echinococcus eggs may also adhere to tires, shoes, or ani ­
mal paws, resulting in more widespread dispersal and con ­
tamination of the environment, including human dwellings.
3.4.4 Diagnosis
In case of definitive host, intestinal infections with E. gran-
ulosus or E. multilocula are typically subclinical. The diag­
nosis of this infection in dogs or cats has been carried out by 
egg isolation methods, coproantigen ELISAs and PCR tests 
for E. granulosus s. l. and for E. multilocularis (Craig et al., 
2015). These techniques can also be used for the examina ­
tion of fecal samples collected in the environment.
3.4.5 Prevention and control
Comprehensive control programs can be carried out for 
prevention and control purpose which includes control of 
stray dogs, slaughter supervision and public education cam­
paigns, routine anthelmintic treatment of dogs and vaccina­
tion of sheep. A treatment schedule individually designed 
for pets based on infection risks (e.g., free roaming, uncon­
trolled access to rodents or offal) can improve treatment effi­
ciency against cestodes. For the treatment purpose, monthly 
administration of praziquantel to dogs is recommended in 
order to reduce environmental contamination with eggs. 
However, even strict compliance of the pet owners will not 
reduce the environmental contamination with eggs.
3.5 Sarcoptes scabiei
3.5.1 Introduction
Sarcoptic mange is a highly contagious mite infestation 
caused by a mite named sarcoptic scabiei. It is also known 
as canine scabies or Scabies. S. scabiei is a type of burrow­
ing mite which burrows into the skin and cause severe itch­
ing, which can result in the formation of scabs and severe 
hair loss. It is of zoonotic importance as it may affect other 
animals including humans. It is worldwide in distribution. 
The condition can become severe if not treated leading to 
thickening of the skin and weeping sores. These mites are 
ectoparasites in nature and burrow deep into the skin and 
forming tunnels. Infestations can occur anywhere on the 
body, but are more common in areas where the skin is thin 
and wrinkled, such as skin of ears, muzzle, face, and elbows 
(Diwakar and Diwakar, 2017).
3.5.2 Etiology
S. scabiei mites belong to the class Arachnida, superorder 
Acariformes, order Sarcoptiformes, suborder Oribatida, 
Infraorder Desmonomata, and the group Astigmata. 
Sarcoptes scabiei belongs to the superfamily Sarcoptoidea 
and family Sarcoptidae along with many other ectoparasitic 
mites of mammals. There are several varieties of S. scabiei 
which affects all domestic mammals and man.
3.5.3 Host and life cycle
In case of dogs, Sarcoptic scabiei canis  is responsible for 
causing sarcoptic mange so for this mite the final host is 
dog. Sarcoptic mange is highly contagious and spread 
through direct contact with the infected animal and need 
no intermediate host. The mites are obligate parasites usu ­
ally spend their entire life on a dog. The causative mite has 
a lifecycle of 17 to 21  days. Adult Sarcoptes scabiei mites

564 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
live 3 to 4 weeks in the host’s skin. After mating, the female 
burrows into the skin, depositing 3 to 4 eggs in the tunnel 
behind her. These tunnels can actually reach the length of 
several centimeters. The eggs hatch in 3–8  days producing 
hexapod (6 legs) larvae which, in turn, move about on the 
skin surface, eventually molting into their nymphal stage. 
The larvae mature into nymphs which have 8 legs. The 
nymph then molts into an adult while it is still in the burrow. 
The adults move on the skin surface where they mate, and 
the cycle begins again with the female burrowing and lay ­
ing eggs. Generally, the mating of these mites takes place 
on the skin of the host and the presence of the sarcoptic 
mite causes intense itching on the skin. They dig into and 
through the skin, causing intense itching from an allergic 
reaction to the mite, and crusting that can quickly become 
infected. Hair loss and crusting frequently appear first on 
elbows and ears. Skin damage can occur from the dogs in ­
tense scratching and biting. Secondary skin infection is also 
common. The dog will chew and scratch its skin constantly. 
This leads to the loss of large amounts of hair, especially on 
the legs and belly. Eventually, the skin will become thick ­
ened and will darken (Diwakar and Diwakar, 2017).
3.5.4 Diagnosis
One of the best methods for diagnosing sarcoptic mange in 
dogs is deep skin scrapings. Multiple deep skin scrapping 
needs to be taken as parasite remains deep into the skin. 
Other diagnostic aids such as enzyme ­linked immunosor­
bent assay (ELISA) for the serological diagnosis of canine 
sarcoptic mange has been evaluated. A characteristic clini ­
cal sign, although non ­specific, is the pinnal ­pedal reflex. 
This is a sign suggestive of sarcoptic mange. Differential 
diagnoses should include contact dermatitis, atopy flea or 
food allergy, pelodera dermatitis, pediculosis, cheyletiello ­
sis, otodectic dermatitis, dermatophytosis, seborrheic der ­
matitis, generalized pyoderma or folliculitis, and bacterial 
hypersensitivity (Fig. 2).
3.5.5 Zoonotic importance
It is a nonseasonal parasite that can be found in dogs of all 
ages and breeds however young dogs of less than 1  year of 
age are mostly affected. Canine scabies is of public health 
importance as 50% of human cases may result from han ­
dling of infected dogs. Human patients usually recover 
spontaneously after infected dog are cured ( Diwakar and 
Diwakar, 2017).
3.5.6 Prevention and control
Treatment should be started as early as possible. Firstly, the 
hair should be clipped and bathing of dog should be done 
with an antiseborrheic shampoo to remove crust and other 
debris. Benzoyl peroxide (2%–3%) and chlorhexidine ­
based shampoos (3%–4%) are commonly recommended. 
Shampooing can be done weekly or more often, as neces ­
sary. Thereafter, acaricidal dip should be given thoroughly. 
Amitraz has been an effective miticide if used three times 
at 2­week interval. Synthetic pyrethroids like deltamethrin 
have also been found very defective in treating the cases of 
canine scabies in 1:250 and 1:500 dilutions twice at 10  day 
interval (Sharma et al., 1991). For intense pruritis, systemic 
corticosteroids may be administered, i.e., Prednisone or 
Prednisolone @0.5 to 1.0  mg/kg body weight orally daily 
for 2–5  days. Ivermectin and its related drugs are found 
quite effective in scabies. Single subcutaneous injection of 
200 to 400 micro gram ivermectin and selamectin @6  mg/
kg in a topical preparation as a unit dose was reported to 
cure scabies ( Six et al., 2000 ). Therapy may take months 
for a complete response to occur. There is a need to clean 
the premises with the help of parasiticidal spray as well to 
control the spread of mites. Separate the infected animal 
from the healthy ones as soon as possible. Proper treatment 
of the infected animal should be done. Regular de­worming 
and vaccinations of the animal should be done. Regular vis­
its to the veterinarian will help maintain the dog’s overall 
health and detect underlying conditions that could weaken 
the dog’s immune system. Regular cleaning of canine prem­
ises should be done with the help of any parasiticidal spray 
to control the spread of mites.
3.6 Cheyletiella blakei
3.6.1 Introduction
Cheyletiella blakei is an ectoparasite of domestic cats which 
is extremely annoying and causes persistent and pruritic 
dermatosis in cats. They remain often underdiagnosed in 
their natural hosts. It is of zoonotic importance, i.e., it can 
FIG.  2  Skin scrapings showing different developmental stages of 
Sarcoptes scabiei.

Zoonotic diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 37  565
be transmitted from the cats to humans. It has got world ­
wide distribution. The site of predilection of the mite is 
head, neck, dorsum, and sometimes crawl in and out of the 
nostrils of cats.
3.6.2 Etiology
Cheyletiella blakei belongs to class Arachnida and super ­
family Trombidiformes (Prostigmata). The adult mites are 
large mites which may be up to 500 by 265  μm and vis ­
ible to the naked eye (Foley, 1991). The body of the mite is 
ovoid, legs are short and have sharp chelicerae for piercing 
the host. The shape of the sense organ on the first pair of 
legs is conical (Schmeitzel, 1988).
3.6.3 Hosts and life cycle
The entire life cycle is on cats and is completed in about 
15 days. There are five developmental stages in the life cycle, 
i.e., egg, larva, nymph I, nymph II, and adult. The adult mite 
attaches eggs to hair ( Foley, 1991). The Cheyletiella mite 
can be present even in animals in good physical condition. 
Long­haired coat cats are more susceptible and can be easily 
transferred to humans. The mite most commonly infests the 
head and face of cats and produces mild eczema­like lesions 
and pruritus. The most characteristic clinical signs are mov­
ing white flakes along the dorsal midline and head of the cat 
and hence called walking dandruff (Foley, 1991).
3.6.4 Diagnosis
The most common and easy method for diagnosis is to comb 
the dandruff­like flakes on black paper and movement of 
debris will be visualized. Sometimes, cellophane tape can 
also be used to entrap mites collected from the hair coat and 
viewed under the compound microscope. Skin scrapings are 
not required.
3.6.5 Zoonotic importance
The mites are quite mobile, and therefore, they can spread 
by direct contact. Sometimes, fomites can also spread the 
mites. The incidence is more seen in cats having long ­hair. 
The Cheyletiella mite produces a nonspecific cutaneous 
scaling with or without pruritus. The lesions on humans 
vary from vesicles to papules, most often on the trunk and 
in particular at locations where the infested animal is held 
against the person’s body (Parish and Schwartzman, 1993).
3.6.6 Prevention and control
The mites are very sensitive to most topical acaricidal prep­
arations, like carbamates and fipronil. Antiseborrheic sham­
poos are helpful in removing heavy scales and crusts prior 
to the use of acaricides. Regular use of topical acaricidal 
shampoos can be used in susceptible cats, their in ­contact 
animals and surroundings.
3.7 Cutaneous larva migrans
3.7.1 Etiology
Cutaneous larva migrans (CLM) is mainly caused by the 
larvae of hookworms, especially those of dogs and cats, viz. 
Ancylostoma caninum and A. braziliense. There are several 
other nematodes which are associated with the disease in ­
clude Uncinaria stenocephala, Bunostomum phlebotomum, 
Gnathostoma spinigerum, Dirofilaria sp., and Strongyloides 
westeri. The disease is worldwide in distribution. Factors 
such as tropical climate, overcrowding, and poor hygiene 
and sanitation problems contribute to the causation. Among 
travelers returning from tropical countries, CLM is the most 
frequent skin disease ( Bouchaud et  al., 2001 ). There are 
various synonyms given for this disease such as creeping 
eruption, plumber’s itch, sand worm, duck hunters itch, and 
epidermatitis linearis migrans are used to describe CLM.
3.7.2 Host and life cycle
Stray dogs play a major role in the environmental con ­
tamination with the helminth eggs. Presence of stray dogs, 
open defecation by both stray and pet dogs, improper fe ­
cal disposal is the conducive factors for the persistence of 
Ancylostoma and Toxocara eggs in the environment. The 
third­stage, L ­3 larvae are considered to be the infective 
stage which penetrates the skin of the host (dog and man). 
In dogs, L­3 stage develops into adult but no such develop­
ment occurs in man (CDC, 2013). Pale membranes, anemia, 
weight loss, bloody stool, weakness, poor growth in pup ­
pies and stunted growth in young animals are the common 
symptoms observed in ancylostomosis (Soulsby, 1982).
3.7.3 Zoonotic importance
In case of humans, the clinical features of CLM vary 
from nonspecific dermatitis to typical creeping eruption 
(Karthikeyan and Thappa, 2002 ). First of all an erythema ­
tous itchy papule is observed followed by about 2–3  mm 
thick, raised pink or flesh colored swollen lesion then there 
is formation of linear, serpentine (serpiginous), or bizarre 
tracks. Lesions are mostly observed on the feet, lower legs, 
and buttocks, but also occur on the arms, hands, and face. 
Sometimes Ancylostoma caninum  larvae may migrate to 
the human intestine, causing eosinophilic enteritis ( CDC, 
2013). CLM patients usually have a history of visiting pub­
lic places commonly accessed by stray dogs. Walking bare 
foot on or sleeping/working in contaminated soil are other 
important factors responsible for CLM in humans (Mohanty 
et al., 2012).
3.7.4 Diagnosis
Diagnosis is mainly based on clinical presentation along the 
relevant history of occupational exposure or recent travel to 
endemic regions. To detect larva and confirm the  diagnosis,

566 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
epiluminescence microscopy is an effective noninvasive 
method. In dogs, coprological examination is performed 
for diagnosis, but molecular studies are needed for species 
identification.
3.7.5 Prevention and control
In case of dogs, treatment mainly includes dichlorvos, pyr ­
antel pamoate, febantel, fenbendazole, and mebendazole. In 
case of humans, if the patient does not undergo treatment, 
complications like impetigo and local or general allergic 
reactions can occur ( Caumes, 2000 ). Such complications 
and long duration of the disease make treatment manda ­
tory. The treatment of choice is ivermectin (a single dose 
of 200  lg kg−1 body weight). Albendazole (400  mg a day 
per os for 3  days) is also effective. Topical application of a 
10%–15% thiabendazole is also effective.
3.8 Visceral larva migrans
3.8.1 Etiology
There are various synonyms given for this disease such as 
toxocarosis, larval granulomatosis, etc. It occurs due to lar­
vae of T. canis and T. cati. Larvae of Ascarissuum, swine 
roundworm could occasionally cause infection in man. It is 
worldwide in distribution with high prevalence in subtropi­
cal countries.
3.8.2 Host and lifecycle
Transmission of this disease mainly occurs when the in ­
fected dogs contaminate the soil with Toxocara sp. eggs, 
and ingestion of these eggs is major route of infection. 
Multiple factors include pica or geophagia, poor hygiene, 
eating raw vegetables, contact with puppies and exposure to 
public places and parks with contaminated soil ( Dar et al., 
2008). Ingestion of raw organs and meat from paratenic 
hosts (pigs, lamb, rabbits, chicken) also leads to the disease 
(English, 2006). Toxocarosis causes serious disease in pups 
whereas in adult dogs usually remains asymptomatic. This 
parasite is responsible for causing serious blood loss, ane ­
mia, acute gastrointestinal hemorrhages, poor growth, loss 
of condition, and sometimes an enlarged abdomen ( Kagira 
and Kanyari, 2000). Death may occur in severe cases.
3.8.3 Zoonotic importance
Most of the time this infection remains asymptomatic. In 
humans, the clinical manifestations mainly depend upon 
the site of larval migration, and the most important sites 
are liver, lungs, heart, and CNS. Fever, hepatomegaly, liver 
necrosis, splenomegaly, eosinophilia (Thakkar et al., 2012), 
and myocarditis are the important clinical manifestations. 
Pulmonary involvement can result in cough, wheeze, dys ­
pnea and pneumonia, or asthma. Signs such as seizures, 
neuropsychiatric symptoms, or encephalopathy could be 
seen during CNS involvement (Jagannath et al., 2009).
3.8.4 Diagnosis
In case of dogs, fecal examination can be done for diagno ­
sis of parasitic ova in the feces while in case of humans, 
serological tests like enzyme ­linked immunosorbent assay 
and imaging techniques such as ultra ­sonography, CT scan 
and MRI could also be used to aid in diagnosis ( Jagannath 
et al., 2009). Sometimes liver biopsy can also be performed 
in diagnosing visceral larva migrans (VLM).
3.8.5 Prevention and control
For the treatment of toxocarosis, a variety of anthelmintic 
drugs are used. Administration of corticosteroids can be 
used in order to suppress the intense allergic manifesta ­
tions of the infection. By controlling the Toxocara infec ­
tion in dogs and cats will reduce the number of infectious 
eggs in the environment and reduce the risk of infection for 
people. It is found that Toxocara eggs have a strong protec­
tive layer, which allows the eggs to survive in the environ ­
ment for months or even years under the right conditions. 
Therefore, many common disinfectants are not effective 
against Toxocara eggs, but extreme heat has been shown to 
kill the eggs. Prompt removal of animal feces can help pre­
vent infection since the eggs require 2 to 4 weeks to become 
infective once they are passed out of the animal.
3.9 Ocular larva migrans
3.9.1 Etiology
Ocular larva migrans (OLM) also known as Toxocaral Retinitis 
is mainly caused by larvae of T. canis and T. cati. Occasionally, 
Baylisascaris procyonis, raccoon roundworm can lead to OLM 
in humans (Brasil et al., 2006). The two main clinical presenta­
tions of toxocariasis are VLM and OLM. The syndromes VLM 
and OLM can be caused by infection with the migrating larvae 
of other kinds of parasites which cause symptoms similar to 
those caused by migrating Toxocara larvae.
3.9.2 Host and lifecycle
Ocular toxocariasis occurs when a microscopic Toxocara 
larva enters the eye and causes inflammation and scarring 
on the retina. OT typically occurs only in one eye and can 
cause irreversible vision loss.
3.9.3 Zoonotic importance
In case of humans, ocular toxocarosis is mostly observed in 
older children and young adults. OLM is usually unilateral 
and there is decrease in visual acuity, strabismus, or leuko­
coria (Shields, 1984). Most common presenting manifesta­
tions are impairment of visual acuity and leukocoria.

Zoonotic diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 37  567
3.9.4 Diagnosis
The tentative diagnosis can be done on the basis of clini ­
cal signs but for confirmatory diagnosis ELISA on serum 
samples can be performed to diagnose the disease (Shields, 
1984).
3.9.5 Prevention and control
In the presence of ocular larva migrans, treatment is di ­
rected toward suppressing intraocular inflammation by glu­
cocorticoid therapy. In addition, antihelminthic drugs such 
as diethylcarbamazine or albendazole should be given to 
eradicate the infection completely. Vitrectomy may be per­
formed, if needed, to improve vision and remove granulo ­
mas (Small et al., 1989).
4 Bacterial diseases
4.1 Brucellosis
Brucellosis in canine is an infectious zoonotic disease 
caused by Brucella canis, which has been reported world ­
wide, and is a major public health concern due to close con­
tact between dogs and humans. In dogs, canine brucellosis 
manifests with abortion outbreaks, reproductive failure, 
enlargement of lymph nodes, and occasionally affects the 
osteoarticular system, although the occurrence of asymp ­
tomatic infections in dogs are not uncommon. Infection of 
dogs occurs mostly by the oronasal route when in contact 
with contaminated tissues such as aborted fetuses, semen, 
urine, and vaginal secretions. The diagnosis in dogs is 
largely based on serologic methods. However, serologic di­
agnosis of canine brucellosis remains very challenging due 
to the low accuracy of available tests. Molecular diagnostic 
methods have been increasingly used in the past few years. 
Treatment of infected dogs is associated with a high fre ­
quency of relapse and should be employed only in selected 
cases.
4.1.1 Zoonotic importance
In humans, the disease is associated with a febrile syn ­
drome, commonly with nonspecific symptoms including 
splenomegaly, fatigue, and weakness. In humans, con ­
tact with contaminated fluids from infected dogs is an 
important source of infection, and it is an occupational 
risk for veterinarians, breeders, laboratory workers, 
among other professionals who deal with infected ani ­
mals or biological samples. Many Brucella  species have 
been identified, including B. melitensis , B. abortus , and 
B. suis , which caused human brucellosis. However, B. 
canis has received less attention as a common pathogen 
in human brucellosis infections ( Seleem et  al., 2010 ). 
Despite the fact that B. canis  is not the cause of bru ­
cellosis in people, farmer populations that had a history 
of exposure to B. canis ­infected canine bodily fluids 
were more frequently the target of reported cases. The 
incubation phase may continue for a few months or 1 to 
4 weeks ( Lucero et al., 2010 ).
In the endemic zone, the individuals may be asymptom­
atic or even exhibit severe clinical signs, such as fever, night 
sweats, and low back pain, which should be distinguished 
from tuberculosis and other cancers ( Hasanjani Roushan 
et al., 2004). In order to prevent the disease’s consequences 
and after effects, brucellosis should be treated. Combination 
therapies, which are frequently used to treat brucellosis, in­
volved taking doxycycline along with either streptomycin 
or rifampin for 6  weeks ( Pappas et  al., 2005 ). Currently, 
there are no commercially available vaccines for prevention 
of canine brucellosis. Therefore, development of novel and 
improved diagnostic methods as well as the development 
of efficacious and safe vaccination protocols are needed for 
an effective control of canine brucellosis and its associated 
zoonotic risk.
4.2 Leptospirosis
Leptospirosis is a bacterial disease that affects many 
mammals, including humans and dogs; dogs can trans ­
mit the bacteria to humans, but the frequency of trans ­
mission and highest risk exposures are poorly understood 
(Fig. 3).
4.2.1 Zoonotic importance
Leptospirosis, known as Weil’s disease in people, can 
cause extremely serious liver and kidney disease, but the 
transmission from dogs to humans is rare. Humans usually 
contract this disease from exposure to contaminated water. 
Leptospirosis in humans is mostly brought on by aerobic 
spirochete L. interrogans . Leptospirosis is a widespread 
zoonosis that is mostly spread to people via polluted en ­
vironmental sources, such as contaminated soil, water, 
urine, or animal tissue. However, domestic animals, such as 
dogs, can play a significant role in leptospirosis transmis ­
sion in endemic locations. Rodents are the main reservoirs 
for leptospirosis ( Moore et al., 2006 ). The primary routes 
of Leptospirosis transmission involve mucosal surfaces of 
the human body, such as the eye, vagina, nose, mouth, or 
erosive lesions, which come into direct touch with contami­
nated urine. This infection typically takes around 10 days to 
incubate (ranging from 2 to 26 days). Numerous symptoms 
including fever, nonproductive cough, headache, muscu ­
loskeletal discomfort, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, alveolar 
hemorrhage, and even meningitis, can accompany leptospi­
rosis (Sehgal, 2006). Doxycycline, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, 
penicillin, amoxicillin, and ampicillin are a few antibiot ­
ics that have been successfully used to treat this disease 
(Kobayashi, 2001).

568 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
4.3 Bordetella bronchiseptica
Bordetella bronchiseptica, a gram­negative rod­shaped bac­
teria, belongs to the genus Bordetella and causes bronchitis. 
Animals with upper respiratory infections, such as dogs and 
cats, frequently carry the infection, which is transmitted to 
people by aerosol. Canines that have B. bronchiseptica can 
develop acute tracheobronchitis, which presents as a raspy, 
kennel cough ­like cough. This organism has been shown 
to be resistant to cephalosporins and macrolides, but mul ­
tiple studies have shown that it is sensitive to fluoroquino ­
lones and Trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole (Egberink et al., 
2009).
4.3.1 Zoonotic importance
B. bronchiseptica infections in humans are relatively rare, 
pneumonia and upper respiratory infections can occur in 
dog owners who have the bacterium (Ner et al., 2003).
4.4 Campylobacteriosis
Gram­negative bacteria called Campylobacter spp., notably 
Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli, commonly 
cause campylobacter enteritis. This bacterium typically 
dwells in the digestive tracts of several mammals. The main 
way that campylobacter is spread is through direct contact 
with diseased animals or their products. The main cam ­
pylobacter reservoirs are dogs and puppies. For instance, 
a research found that campylobacter was isolated from 
roughly 47% of the dog fecal sample ( Janda et al., 2006 ). 
Campylobacter enteritis has an incubation period of 1 to 
7 days.
4.4.1 Zoonotic importance
In case of humans, majority of patients have fever, nausea, 
diarrhea, and stomach pain. Also, more than 50% of the in­
fected patients may have bloody diarrhea. In some cases, 
convulsion and seizures may be seen ( Gazaigne et  al., 
2008). This illness typically resolves on its own and does 
not require antibiotic treatment. Consideration should be 
given to hydration and electrolyte balance correction. In 
individuals with severe illness, fluoroquinolone, macro ­
lide, or aminoglycoside antibiotic therapy is recommended 
(Ternhag et al., 2007).
4.5 Capnocytophaga infection
This infection is caused by gram ­negative bacterium 
Capnocytophaga canimorsus which is the normal commen­
sal of the oropharyngeal tract of dogs and cats.
Rodents
carrier
contaminated
soil and water
mammalian
reservoir
(wild and
domestic
animals)
contaminated
soil and water
FIG. 3 Diagram showing the transmission cycle of Leptospirosis.

Zoonotic diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 37  569
4.5.1 Zoonotic importance
The pathogen, which primarily infects humans through dog 
bites, can result in a severe sepsis, especially in old, im ­
munocompromised, or asplenic patients. The pathogen can 
also cause meningitis, osteomyelitis, arthritis, lung abscess 
or empyema, and endocarditis, all of which are deadly ill ­
nesses. Additionally, particularly in people with impaired 
immune systems, hemolytic uremic syndrome and throm ­
botic thrombocytopenic purpura can be linked to capnocy ­
tophaga septicemia ( Biedermann and Deligne, 2003 ). The 
data from the literature have shown that the estimated mor­
tality rate from capnocytophaga septicemia is one ­third of 
the infected patients. Therefore, third ­generation cephalo­
sporins should be used as early empirical therapy in indi ­
viduals who have been bitten by a dog ( Jolivet­Gougeon 
et al., 2007).
4.6 Coxiella burnetii infection
4.6.1 Zoonotic importance
Humans get Q fever from the obligatory intracellular gram­
negative bacteria C. burnetii. Normally, the disease spreads 
to people by aerosols and direct contact with the bodily flu­
ids of infected animals. Despite the fact that dogs are not the 
primary carriers of C. burnetii, a study showed that about 
10% of farm dogs carried the pathogen ( Cosman et  al., 
2013). In addition, C. burnetii was found to be transferrable 
from an infected parturient dog to a human in a different 
investigation by Buhariwalla and colleagues. The patients 
also experienced the Q fever symptoms of fever, chills, 
nausea, vomiting, and a strong cough. In chest radiography, 
opacity is a frequent finding, and during auscultation during 
a physical examination, crackles may be audible. According 
to this investigation, the incubation period lasted between 
8 and 12  days following contact with the diseased animal. 
Fluoroquinolones or doxycycline are effective treatments 
for C. burnetii patients (Patel et al., 2011).
4.7 Methicillin resistance Staphylococcus 
aureus
Methicillin resistance Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA) is 
a common cause of infection ­related death in people. This 
pathogen has reportedly been isolated from a variety of ani­
mals, including pigs, horses, cattle, cats, and dogs, accord ­
ing to several studies. Some of them had the opinion that 
companion animals were the primary carriers of MRSA, as 
they could pass the infection to their owners directly.
4.7.1 Zoonotic importance
It appears that patients with impaired immune systems are 
more likely to contract MRSA from animals. However, 
other data suggested that these bacteria could spread to 
healthy people who own an affected animal. Treatment of 
infections brought on by MRSA does not improve with 
the use of conventional antistaphylococcal drugs. As a re ­
sult, modern medications like vancomycin, linezolid, and 
daptomycin are frequently used to treat MRSA infections 
(Morgan, 2008).
4.8 Salmonella
Salmonella species are anaerobic, mobile, gram ­negative 
bacilli that thrive in the large intestine of many animals, 
particularly in the canine’s mesenteric lymph nodes and the 
distal portion of the colon.
4.8.1 Zoonotic importance
Several infectious illnesses, including gastroenteritis, en ­
teric fever, bacteremia, and osteomyelitis, can also infect 
humans through the digestive system (fecal transmission). 
The most frequent clinical manifestations of Salmonella 
in humans and dogs are gastrointestinal illnesses; how ­
ever, the majorities of infected animals or people are as ­
ymptomatic and can shed the virus through feces for up 
to 6 weeks, which allows it to spread to other animals or 
people. Salmonella species are more common in develop ­
ing countries than they are in developed ones ( Leonard, 
2014). Salmonella infections should be treated with anti ­
biotics from different families, such as fluoroquinolones, 
beta­ lactams, and macrolides. Although an antibiogram 
should be taken into consideration for people who have the 
infection (Leonard et al., 2011).
4.9 Staphylococcus intermedius
S. intermedius  is a gram ­positive, coagulase ­producing 
bacteria that often resides in the front of the nasal cav ­
ity of a variety of species, including dogs, pigeons, and 
horses. According to recent research, this pathogen might 
also be isolated from healthy dogs’ gingiva ( Hoekstra and 
Paulton, 2002).
4.9.1 Zoonotic importance
Although S. intermedius  is not a typical zoonotic disease 
that affects humans, studies have shown that it is a possible 
pathogen linked to dog bite wounds and that cellulitis can 
occur in patients. It’s crucial to differentiate this bacterium 
from Staphylococcus aureus. Effective treatments for this 
infection include penicillin and amoxicillin ­clavulanate 
(Armstrong III et al., 2004).
4.10 Yersinia enterocolitica
A gram ­negative coccobacillus zoonotic pathogen called 
Y. enterocolitica causes yersiniosis in both humans and 
animals. Birds, pigs, deer, and cattle are a few of the  major

570 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
Y. enterocolitica  reservoirs. In some investigations, the 
pathogen was isolated from dog bite wound ( Fredriksson­
Ahomaa, 2007).
4.10.1 Zoonotic importance
When the pathogen invades the mucosal surface of the co ­
lon, patients may first show no symptoms. However, wa ­
tery or bloody diarrhea may then appear. Additionally, the 
infection may involve Peyer’s patches and exhibit symp ­
toms of appendicitis ( Abdel­Haq et al., 2000 ). Most cases 
of Y. enterocolitica are self ­limited and do not require an ­
tibiotic treatment; however, patients with severe infection 
and those who are immunocompromised should be treated 
with an aminoglycoside and doxycycline together.
4.11 Cat scratch disease (Bartonella henselae)
Bartonella henselae and, less frequently, other Bartonella spe­
cies are the bacteria that cause cat scratch disease (CSD). Cats 
can contract the disease from flea bites, blood transfusions, or 
fights with other affected cats. The bacteria is most likely to be 
present in young cats (under 1 year of age), stray or shelter cats, 
cats that are currently or have previously had flea infestations, 
and cats that hunt. Cats have been exposed to the germs be­
tween one­third and 50% of the time. Even while the majority 
of infected cats do not show symptoms, some cats may have 
a moderate sickness with a temperature that lasts for around 
2–3 days. Rarely, the illness can make cats exhibit more se­
vere symptoms like vomiting, red eyes, enlarged lymph nodes, 
exhaustion, and/or decreased appetite. Compared to cats, 
Bartonella infection in dogs is less common but more likely to 
result in sickness. The CSD bacteria may cause a mild infec­
tion with a small, raised, solid bump at the site of the scratch 
and lymph node swelling near the site of the scratch. This oc­
curs 1–3 weeks after exposure (for example, a cat scratch or 
lick). The infection can also cause fever, and less commonly 
eye infection, muscle pain, or more severe symptoms.
4.11.1 Zoonotic importance
The germs can spread to people when they lick or scratch an 
infected cat. Anyone can contract CSD, although those un ­
der the age of 15 and those with compromised immune sys­
tems are more likely to become ill than healthy individuals.
4.12 Plague (Yersinia pestis)
Yersinia pestis, a bacterium that may infect humans and ani­
mals, is what causes the plague. Fleas can spread the infec­
tion to rats and other small animals in the western United 
States. People and animals (dogs and cats) that are bitten 
by infected fleas are at risk. Cats and dogs are both capable 
of contracting the plague and passing it on to people. The 
majority of flea ­related illnesses affect both humans and 
animals; however contact with animals that have the plague 
can also make people ill. A sick cat’s coughing up infectious 
droplets into the air can also expose people to the disease. 
Fevers, poor appetites, lack of energy, and swollen lymph 
nodes on their necks that can resemble wounds are some of 
the symptoms of plague in cats. Cats that have plague pneu­
monia may cough or have breathing problems.
4.12.1 Zoonotic importance
Travelers and residents of rural areas may be at risk. 
Additionally, those who have animal contact (such as 
those who sleep with pets) and hunters may be in danger. 
Particularly vulnerable to the pandemic are cats. To lower 
the risk of human illness, owners should limit human con ­
tact with sick pets and seek veterinarian care as soon as 
possible. The most prevalent type of plague among humans 
is bubonic. Bubonic plague symptoms include painful, en ­
larged lymph nodes, high fever that appears out of nowhere, 
chills, headache, and weakness. More severe symptoms 
may result from other types of plague, such as septicemic 
plague and plague pneumonia.

Zoonotic diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 37  571

572 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats

573

1 Introduction
People like to keep pets as their companion animals, and 
during the last 50 years, their number has increased in so -
ciety. The social role of dogs and cats has changed. They 
live in close contact with human beings, and therefore, the 
attention toward the welfare of these animals is increased 
(Mackenzie et al., 2014). Due to close contact with humans 
and animals, the chances for the spread of zoonotic and 
anthroponotic diseases have increased. These animals can 
transmit diseases to human beings and vice versa. A human 
may acquire resistant genes or microbes not only from food 
animals but also from dogs and cats via contact ( Ru et al., 
2017).
One health is a concept that deals with the intercon -
nection among animals, humans, and the environment. 
Household pets can act as a reservoir of various zoo -
notic diseases and may transmit microbes to their owners 
(Duquette and Nuttall, 2004). A contaminated environment 
in which both humans and animals are living can also be the 
source of the transmission of many infectious diseases from 
animals to humans (Duquette and Nuttall, 2004). Although 
the organisms that are responsible for the occurrence of in-
fection are different from the pathogens that infect human 
beings, it is not always the case because many zoonotic 
microscopic pathogens cause diseases in both humans and 
pets (David et al., 2020).
Many emergent pathogens are not only limited to ani -
mals but diagnosed in humans as well ( Mackenzie et  al., 
2014). The development of antimicrobial drug resistance in 
human medicine has highlighted the problem of resistance 
occurrence in animals against the drugs used for the treat -
ment of infectious diseases ( Alanis, 2005). The antibiotic 
resistance in the bacterial pathogens of dogs and cats may 
be less severe than that of pathogenic microbes isolated 
from human beings. This may be due to less exposure of 
dogs and cats to antimicrobial drug therapy and the short 
duration of treatment because they are seldom hospitalized. 
The second reason is that the animals whose immune sys -
tem is compromised are less likely to be treated with potent 
and broad-spectrum medicines (Prescott et al., 2002).
Nowadays, resistance is a major problem in the control 
and treatment of many infectious diseases. If we give medi-
cation against a pathogen, only nonresistant pathogens will 
be diminished but resistant microbes will continue to grow 
and multiply. The microbes which are resistant to three or 
more drugs are known as multidrug-resistant pathogens. 
There are many methods through which bacteria acquire 
resistant genes and become resistant too ( Kroemer et  al., 
2014). Transposons are the small pieces of the bacterial 
genome that facilitate the spread and incorporation of mul -
tiple resistant genes into the victim genome or plasmids 
(Gandolfi-Decristophoris et  al., 2013 ). The antimicrobial 
susceptible bacteria acquire resistant genes through conju -
gation, transformation, and transduction ( Tenover, 2006). 
The horizontal transfer of resistant genes from one microbe 
to the other is the main mediator of antibiotic resistance.
Anthelmintic drugs are used for the prevention and con-
trol of parasitic worms. Benzimidazole is a broad-spectrum 
drug used to control gastrointestinal worms. The improper 
use of these drugs has resulted in the emergence of resis -
tant strains of parasites that are no longer effectively pre -
ventable with these drugs. However, the alternate use of 
antiparasitic drugs can prevent the spread and emergence 
of resistant variants ( Gokbulut et  al., 2007 ). Vaccination 
plays a significant role in the prevention of infectious dis -
eases and is used for prophylactic purposes. Viruses and 
bacteria continuously change their genetic material through 
mutation. This property of pathogens results in the develop-
ment of resistance against specifically developed vaccines 
(Klingborg et al., 2002). So that it is important to assess the 
pathogens of various infectious diseases which are resistant 
Chapter 38
Drug resistance of infectious diseases  
of dogs and cats

574 SECTION  | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
to  already-developed drugs. In this way, we can limit them, 
and the efficacy of drugs can also be maintained.
2 Emerging drug resistance leads 
to global threat and its economic 
importance
There are many reasons for our concern regarding the 
emergence of resistance and a decrease in the efficacy of 
drugs. Microbial resistant results in the failure of treat -
ment and is a life-threatening situation for critically ill 
patients (Mackenzie et al., 2014 ). Dogs and cats live very 
close to human beings. A unique aspect of this associa -
tion may result in the transmission of resistant strains of 
bacteria, particularly Gram-negative bacteria, and various 
other pathogens. The close sharing of living will result in 
the transfer of interspecies pathogens from animals to hu -
mans and vice versa. The emergence of multidrug- resistant 
microbes in dogs and cats has imposed serious health 
problems ( Wongsawan et  al., 2021). The shared environ -
ment of dogs and cats with people has increased the risk 
for the spread and transmission of antimicrobial-resistant 
microbes to human beings. The horizontal transfer of re -
sistant genes between pets and humans is also a risk factor 
for the emergence of drug resistance (Duquette and Nuttall, 
2004). Prolonged therapy with antibiotics such as vancomy-
cin leads to a low-level development of resistance that is not 
detectable in laboratories. The resistant pathogen may also 
spread and become the source of broader infection, which 
is difficult to control, and require more time, and expensive 
protocols (Tenover, 2006).
3 Accelerating factors responsible for 
drug resistance of infectious diseases of 
companion animals
Improper treatment of dogs and cats leads to many health 
problems such as the development of drug resistance (refer 
to Fig. 1), prolonged duration of illness, repeated therapy, 
and regulatory and public health concerns ( Weese et  al., 
2019). Resistance to antibacterial drugs is mostly associated 
with frequent exposure of animals to hospitals or prolonged 
hospitalization, extensive wound, and immune suppression. 
The prophylactical use of antibiotics in dogs and cats at vet-
erinary hospitals could also be the cause of the development 
of antibiotic-drug-resistant bacteria.
3.1 Role of mutation
There are many scenarios through which mutation leads to 
drug resistance. The mutation is a critical mechanism that 
results in resistance occurrence. It can turn a drug from an 
antagonistic drug into an agonistic drug. Most bacteria are 
haploid and have a short duration of a cycle which makes 
them the best candidate for the mutation. Mutation of rifam-
picin and streptomycin arises which lead to serious health 
concern and limited the use of a single drug in therapy. 
However, the mutation in synthetic drugs such as fluoroqui-
nolones and oxazolidines is readily less (Guardabassi et al., 
2004).
3.2 Antigenic shift and antigenic drift
The point mutation in the genome of pathogens results in 
little phenotypic changes and is known as antigenic drift. 
While the antigenic shift arises from the genetic reassort -
ment of gene sequence between the two viruses affecting 
the same cell such as influenza viruses. Both these phenom-
ena play an essential role in the emergence of drug resis -
tance (Alanis, 2005).
3.3 Misuse of antimicrobial drugs
Improper medication and inadequate doses of drugs given 
to pets for the treatment of infectious diseases result in anti-
microbial resistance. Similarly, the misusing and overusing 
of drugs may lead to the development and spread of an -
tibiotic, anthelmintic, or antiprotozoal-resistant organisms 
(Alanis, 2005).
3.4 Emergence of new pathogenic variants
Mutation, antigenic shift, antigenic drift, conjugation, trans-
formation, or transduction will result in minor changes in 
the genome sequence of the pathogenic organism which 
remains no longer susceptible to already available drugs 
used against them. The emerging new pathogenic variants 
are stronger than the previous ones (Berrafato et al., 2019).
4 Antimicrobial drug resistance in dogs 
and cats
For therapeutic and prophylactic, proposed antimicrobial 
drugs are commonly used in companion animals. The 
widespread use of broad-spectrum antibiotics in small 
animals is reported worldwide. The most frequently used 
drugs are beta-lactams (amoxicillin), cephalosporin, lin -
cosamides, fluoroquinolones, macrolides, tetracycline, 
and trimethoprim in small animal practice ( Kawamura 
et al., 2017 ). The ability of bacteria to develop antibiotic 
resistance has complicated the treatment of the diseases. 
Antibiotics act in many ways to limit the bacteria such as 
interference with the synthesis of the cell wall, inhibiting 
the synthesis of protein, interference with the synthesis of 
nucleic acid, bacterial membrane disruption, and metabolic 
pathway inhibition (Tenover, 2006).

Drug resistance of infectious diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 38  575
4.1 Antibacterial drug resistance
Many factors make microbes resistant to one or more than 
one classes of antibiotics (Weese et al., 2011; Rankin et al., 
2017). They are maybe intrinsically resistant to drugs or 
may acquire resistance by mutation, or through the acquisi-
tion of other bacterial-resistant genes. Bacteria incorporate 
the acquired resistant genes in their genome and produce 
enzymes that destroy the antibacterial drugs used against 
them and prevent drugs to reach their intrinsic targets, mod-
ifying the target site of the drug, or making an alternative 
pathway of metabolism that bypasses the action of the drugs 
(Tenover, 2006).
Many infections caused by resistant bacteria to com -
monly used antibiotics now have become an important 
global healthcare threat. These infections are not only 
prolonging the duration of the disease, but they are also 
very costly to diagnose and treat significantly ( Alanis, 
2005). Extended-spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) or 
ampicillinase C (AmpC) producing Enterobacteriaceae, 
methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus pseudintermedius  
(MRSP), methicillin-resistant Staphylococcus aureus  
(MRSA), and multidrug resistant Gram-negative non -
fermenting bacteria have emerged in sick and healthy 
companion animals (dog and cat) ( Harrison et al., 2014 ). 
Humans are at risk to acquire these resistant bacteria 
from infected or carrier animals which poses a serious 
public health concern ( Kawamura et al., 2017 ; Ru et al., 
2017).
4.2 Antifungal drug resistance
The drugs which kill or stop the growth of pathogenic fungi 
that become the source of infection is known as antifungal 
drugs. Like antibiotic resistance, the occurrence of resis -
tance in antifungal drugs is also possible when fungi no lon-
ger respond to the drugs used against them. There are three 
types of antifungal drugs used for the infectious diseases 
of fungi in dogs and cats. The emergence of resistance in 
these medicines will greatly impair the therapy of infection 
and limit treatment options, e.g., Candida auris can become 
resistant to all three types of antifungal drugs (Talbot et al., 
2015). Therefore, its control is very difficult. Fungal infec-
tions are not only limited to the outer skin like ringworm 
infection but they can also cause severe and life- threatening 
conditions if they reach internal organs, especially the brain. 
If antifungal treatment is limited, the severe infections of 
the heart, blood, brain, and eye caused by invasive fungi 
will be difficult to cure (Prescott et al., 2002).
Naturally certain types of antifungal drugs are not ef -
fective against some species of fungi, e.g., Aspergillus is 
resistant to fluconazole. Resistance can also occur when an 
ill dog or cat is frequently exposed to antifungal medicines 
(Talbot et al., 2015). Furthermore, the use of fungicides in 
agriculture is also contributing to the development of drug 
resistance in animals because their residues appear in the 
diet of animals. The resistance is observed in the follow -
ing fungi, viz. Aspergillus and Candida species including 
Candida auris (Prescott et al., 2002).
FIG. 1 Development of drug resistance.

576 SECTION  | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
4.3 Vaccinal resistance
Veterinarians usually recommend vaccination to prevent the 
occurrence of diseases ( Ge et al., 2011 ). The strains used 
in vaccines are less or even not pathogenic which provoke 
the host immune system to produce antibodies against the 
administered antigens. With the advent of new strains of 
viruses and bacteria which causes diseases, the protection 
provided by vaccines is reduced over time ( Aubert, 1992). 
Therefore, the vaccination of pets with the previous vac -
cinal strain along with the new strain is required to fully 
protect the dogs and cats from the attack of pathogens. The 
commonly used vaccines against different infectious dis -
eases in dogs and cats include a vaccine for rabies, parvo -
virus vaccine, canine distemper virus vaccine, calicivirus 
vaccine, etc. (Klingborg et al., 2002).
5 Emergence and spread of resistance in 
the drugs used against parasitic infections 
of dogs and cats
Antiparasitic drugs are a vital tool for the control and pre -
vention of parasitic diseases in animals including dogs and 
cats. The loss of efficacy of antiprotozoal and anthelmintic 
drugs can seriously affect the welfare and health of compan-
ion animals ( Bengtsson and Greko, 2014 ). As they live in 
close association with human beings, if not properly treated 
against all types of ectoparasite and endoparasite may lead 
to the spread of infection from animals to humans. Improper 
therapy also contributed to the emergence of a resistant 
strain that poses serious public health risks (Ru et al., 2017).
5.1 Antiprotozoal drug resistance
The main line of defense against protozoal diseases in ani -
mals is chemotherapy which is commonly used to prevent 
and control the diseases caused by protozoa. This defense 
against protozoal diseases is being eroded by the emergence 
of drug resistance. Now many pathogenic species are no 
longer susceptible to commonly used drugs. Polymerase 
chain reaction, cloning of genes, and monoclonal antibodies 
against the proteins which become resistant to drugs can be 
used to recognize. The mechanism behind the development 
of antiprotozoal drug resistance is that there is a decrease in 
the uptake of the drug due to loss of transporters, parasitic 
export of drugs by P-glycoproteins and other ATPase, loss of 
the activation of the drug is the main mechanism for the resis-
tance in Giardia and Trichomonas species, and alteration of 
drugs targets also lead to the development of drug resistance.
5.2 Anthelminthic drug resistance
Anthelmintic macrocyclic lactone is currently only the class 
of drug used to control Dirofilaria immitis. Macrocyclic 
 lactones include moxidectin and ivermectin (Berrafato et al., 
2019). These drugs are commercially available to treat heart-
worm disease in dogs and cats. The efficacy of these drugs 
in low doses is 100% for the prevention of third-stage larvae 
(L3) of D. immitis, but the higher dose of these drugs can 
also diminish circulating microfilaria (Mf) in the blood ves-
sels of the infected host. These drugs show their mechanism 
of action by stimulating the attachment of D. immitis with 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMNs) and peripheral blood 
mononuclear cells (Mavropoulou et al., 2014). Currently, re-
sistance in the efficacy of ivermectin and moxidectin is ob-
served. Resistance to a drug is associated with the Mf strain 
of D. immitis which reduced the efficacy of macrocyclic lac-
tone anthelmintics (Berrafato et al., 2019; Table 1).
6 Possible ways to conserve drug 
efficacy and prevent drug resistance
We need to improve the guidelines used for the prescription 
of drugs in dogs and cats so that we can cope with the chal-
lenge of drug resistance. Drug efficacy can be achieved by 
the appropriate selection of drugs based on pathogen culture 
and testing for the susceptibility of the drug ( Wongsawan 
et al., 2021). The rational and judicious use of medicine by 
the veterinarian may result in the prevention of drug resis -
tance. The effective control of the spread of resistant organ-
isms or their resistant genes especially from patients treated 
with broad-spectrum medicines at hospitals may limit the 
emergence of drug resistance ( Prescott et  al., 2002 ). The 
responsible use of drugs should prevent resistance to drugs 
(Duquette and Nuttall, 2004).
7 Future perspective
The emergence of resistant strains of pathogens that are 
least or not even susceptible to already discovered drugs 
is the most serious challenge that seeking the attention of 
the world. Drug resistance is increasing in pets, but the 
rate of discovery and formulation of new and effective 
drugs is slow and does not meet the medicinal demands. 
The currently, discovered antibiotics disrupt the mecha -
nism of bacterial central dogma, but they have evolved new 
and alternate metabolic pathways to bypass the action of 
drugs used against them (Petchiappan and Chatterji, 2017). 
The identification of new metabolic pathways and stress-
associated pathways for the bacteria will play a key role 
in the discovery of new drugs. Targeting small RNAs and 
antimicrobial peptides would facilitate in the near future 
to combat drug resistance. Due to the loss of efficacy of 
many drugs, there is a need for the development of new and 
novel therapeutic strategies for the control of multiresistant 
strains of pathogens. If antimicrobial resistance is not con -
trolled, diseases which seem to be very simple will become 
very dangerous (Singleton et al., 2020).

Drug resistance of infectious diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 38  577
TABLE 1 Different classes of drugs used for treatment in pets.
Class of drugs Example Effect
Resistant 
pathogen Mode of action References
Quinolones/
fluoroquinolone
Ciprofloxacin, 
nalidixic acid
Bacteriocidal Enterobacteriaceae DNA synthesis 
inhibitor
Dupouy et al. 
(2019)
Rifamycin Rifampin, rifabutin, 
rifapentine
Bacteriocidal Methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus 
pseudintermedius
Transcription 
inhibitor
Kadlec et al. 
(2011)
Aminoglycoside Gentamycin, 
vancomycin
Bacteriocidal Enterobacteriaceae, 
Staphylococci
Translation 
inhibitors
Guardabassi et al. 
(2004) and Wu 
et al. (2019)
Tetracycline Tetracycline Bacteriostatic Staphylococcus 
intermedius
Translation 
inhibitors
Kim et al. (2005)
Chloramphenicol Chloramphenicol Bacteriostatic Staphylococcus 
intermedius
Translation 
inhibitors
Wu et al. (2019) 
and Kim et al. 
(2005)
Oxazolidionone Linezolid, posizolid Bacteriostatic Enterobacteriaceae, 
Staphylococci
Translation 
inhibitors
Wu et al. (2019)
Macrolide Erythromycin, 
azithromycin
Bacteriostatic Staphylococci Translation 
inhibitors
Tenover (2006)
Sulfonamide Sulfadiazine, 
sulfamethizole
Bacteriostatic Staphylococcus 
intermedius, 
Escherichia 
coli, Salmonella 
typhimurium
Folate synthesis 
inhibitor
Guardabassi et al. 
(2004)
Trimethoprim Trimethoprim Bacteriostatic Staphylococcus 
spp., Streptococcus 
spp., Enterococcus 
spp., Pseudomonas 
spp., E. coli, Proteus 
spp., Klebsiella spp.
Folate synthesis 
inhibitor
Li et al. (2021)
Polymyxin Colistin, polymyxin 
B
Bacteriocidal Pseudomonas 
aeruginosa
Cell membrane 
disruptor
Scott et al. (2019)
Beta-lactam Cephalosporin, 
penicillin
Bacteriocidal E. coli Cell wall synthesis 
inhibitor
Kawamura et al. 
(2017)
Cephalosporin Cefotaxime Bacteriocidal Enterobacteriaceae Dupouy et al. 
(2019) and 
Petchiappan and 
Chatterji (2017)
Penicillin Amoxicillin Bacteriocidal Enterobacteriaceae Kawamura et al. 
(2017)
Triazole Azole, clotrimazole Fungistatic Aspegillus 
fumigatus
Inhibit 14-alpha-
lanosterol 
demethylase
Talbot et al. (2015)
Anthelmintic Ivermectin, 
doxycyclin
Anthelmintic Dirofilaria immitis Binds to glutamate-
gated chloride 
channel
Mavropoulou 
et al. (2014)
Anthelmintic Macrocyclic 
lactone
Anthelmintic Dirofilaria immitis GABA agonist, 
Binds to glutamate-
gated chloride 
channel
Berrafato et al. 
(2019)

578 SECTION  | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
8 Conclusion
The present pace of anthelmintic, antibiotic, antiparasitic, 
or novel targets for vaccine discovery is not sufficient to 
combat the emergence of drug resistance, necessitating the 
importance of the identification of new strategies and tech-
niques. Most drugs target the process of central dogma or 
the metabolism of the cell wall, and there is a requirement 
to recognize the new targets for the discovery of drugs. The 
improper use of drugs leads to the development of drug-
resistant in dogs and cats.
Acknowledgments
The author wishes to thank all other co-authors for providing guidance 
and support.

Drug resistance of infectious diseases of dogs and cats   Chapter | 38  579

581

Chapter 39
Diagnostic techniques of infectious 
diseases of dogs and cats
Disease diagnosis is a step-by-step rule out procedure in -
volving various analytical approaches to diagnose a dis -
ease. Diagnostic techniques are various methods which 
are used for diagnosing of a disease. Infectious diseases 
in dogs and cats are primarily caused by infectious agents 
like virus, bacteria, parasite, fungi, and rickettsial diseases. 
There are various diagnostic techniques which are broadly 
grouped under following categories according to clinical 
approaches:
1. Clinical pathological techniques
2. Microbiological techniques
3. Necropsy and histopathological techniques.
1 Clinical pathological techniques
Clinical pathological techniques are the first approach used 
for diagnosis of diseases. Examination of blood, serum, 
plasma, urine, and other body fluids collected from the clin-
ical cases of affected dogs and cats are the representative 
samples used for diagnosis. Following are the important ex-
aminations can performed under this:
 (i) Hematological examination
 (ii) Biochemical examination
 (iii) Urine examination
 (iv) Cytological examination.
(1) Hematological examination: It includes parameters re -
lated to complete blood count (CBC), RBCs, WBCs, 
and platelets. RBC parameters include hemoglobin, 
total erythrocytes count, pack cell volume, erythrocytic 
indices: MCH, MCV , and MCHC.
2 Microbiological techniques
This section include isolation and culturing of bacteria, 
 virus and fungus etc.
3 Necropsy and histopathological 
technique
This section discusses postmortem examination of carcass 
and microscopic examination of tissue.
4 Diagnostic interpretation of common 
diseases in dogs and cats
4.1 Bacterial diseases
a. Brucellosis: Bacterial disease of dog caused by B. canis.
■ Hematologic and biochemical values are either unal-
tered or nonspecific in canine brucellosis.
■ Hyperglobulinemia (β and γ) with concomitant hy -
poalbuminemia has been the most consistent finding 
in chronically infected dogs.
■ Examination of aspirates or biopsy samples from en-
larged lymph nodes usually reveals lymphoid hyper-
plasia with large numbers of plasma cells. Abortion 
noticed in bitches after 50 days of gestation. Male 
dog showed Orchitis and Epididymitis. Aborted foe-
tus showed bronchopneumonia.
■ Cerebrospinal fluid analysis results are pleocytosis, 
primarily consisting of neutrophils, and increased 
protein concentration with meningoencephalitis, but 
they are unremarkable when diskospondylitis alone 
is present:
b. Leptospirosis: Bacterial disease.
■ Hematologic findings in typical cases of canine lepto-
spirosis include leukocytosis and thrombocytopenia.
■ Leukocyte counts fluctuate depending on the stage 
and severity of infection.
■ Leukopenia, common in the leptospiremic phase, 
develops into leukocytosis with a left shift. In later 
stages, white blood cell counts usually range from 
16,500 to 45,000 cells/μL.

582 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
■ Thrombocytopenia is often a prognostic manifesta -
tion of severe cases of leptospirosis, and the degree 
correlates with the severity of respiratory distress 
and radiographic pulmonary changes.
■ Anemia of mild severity is often observed in dogs 
with leptospirosis. It is usually nonregenerative, 
which may reflect: the presence of acute oliguric 
renal failure with over hydration; decreased erythro-
cyte production from chronic renal failure or chronic 
inflammatory disease; or acute (less than 4-day dura-
tion blood loss from tissue thrombosis and/or acute 
pulmonary or GI hemorrhage).
■ The majority of dogs with leptospirosis are azotemic 
on initial examination. Increases in serum urea nitro-
gen and creatinine concentrations are found in dogs 
with varying severity of kidney disease.
■ Hypoalbuminemia can be observed, * (likely from 
proteinuria or SIRS), and the serum albumin:globulin 
ratio is usually reduced.
■ Hyponatremia, hypochloremia, hypokalemia, and 
hyperphosphatemia are present in most cases, 
whereas hyperkalemia develops only in dogs with 
terminal oliguric renal failure.
■ Hypoglycemia is occasionally present with severe he-
patic failure. Hepatic dysfunction may be apparent in 
some dogs, but it usually is less dramatic than renal 
failure or is associated with concurrent renal failure. 
Liver damage is demonstrated by increased serum 
alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, 
lactate dehydrogenase, and alkaline phosphatase activ-
ities and bilirubin concentration. The increase in serum 
alkaline phosphatase activity is often proportionally 
greater than that of alanine aminotransferase activity.
■ Bilirubin concentration may be increased in serum 
and urine, and the magnitude is usually proportional 
to the degree of liver impairment and is a very com-
mon finding. Marked bilirubinuria usually precedes 
hyperbilirubinemia.
■ Serum bilirubin peaks by days 6–8 after onset of dis-
ease. Increased sulfobromophthalein retention (more 
than 5%) can be found in acute leptospirosis before 
the onset of icterus and in dogs that later develop 
chronic active hepatitis.
■ Increased serum amylase and lipase activities may re-
sult from their release from inflamed hepatic and small 
intestinal tissues and from decreased renal excretion.
■ Increased serum amylase and lipase activities and in-
creased pancreatic lipase immunoreactivity are found 
in some dogs with apparent secondary pancreatitis.
■ Serum cardiac troponin concentrations have been 
increased in some dogs, suggesting myocardial 
damage.
■ Serum creatine kinase activity is increased when 
skeletal muscle inflammation occurs.
■ Urinalysis is very often characterized by glycosuria, 
tubular or glomerular proteinuria, and bilirubinuria 
and, in some cases, by increased numbers of granular 
casts, leukocytes, and erythrocytes in the sediment.
■ Some dogs have an increased ratio of protein to 
creatinine in their urine in the presence of a low-  
cellularity urinary sediment, which indicates the 
kidney as the source of the urine protein.
■ The concurrent presence of glycosuria or casts with 
proteinuria can be explained by acute tubular injury.
■ Findings of predominantly low- and sometimes 
high-molecular weight urine proteins are compatible 
with tubular and glomerular sources, respectively, 
although glomerular pathology is not a primary fea -
ture of leptospirosis, which is predominantly a tubu-
lointerstitial nephritis.
c. Actinomycosis
■ Animals with extensive chronic disease have mild-to-
moderate nonregenerative anemia, leukocytosis with 
a mild-to-moderate left shift and monocytosis, hy -
poalbuminemia, and hyperglobulinemia, which may 
be marked. Pleuritis, peritonitis, visceral abcess and 
arthritis commonly observed in affected animals.
d. Mycobacterium infections
■ Clinical laboratory findings in mycobacterial infec -
tions are frequently nonspecific and include moder -
ate leukocytosis and anemia.
■ The anemia, which is usually nonregenerative, is 
reportedly macrocytic in some cats with intestinal 
infections.
■ Normal-to-reduced serum albumin levels and hyper-
globulinemia are frequently apparent.
■ Hypercalcemia may be present as a result of the 
granulomatous inflammation as observed in other 
mycobacterial infections.
■ With MAC infection, dogs have had anemia, leu -
kocytosis, lymphopenia, hypoalbuminemia, and in -
creased liver enzyme activities.
■ Cats typically have anemia, neutrophilic leukocyto -
sis, and hyperglobulinemia.
e. Nocardia infection (Nocardiosis)
■ Animals with nocardiosis often have nonregen -
erative anemia, neutrophilic leukocytosis with a 
left shift, monocytosis, and sometimes marked 
hyper glo  bulinemia.
■ Hypercalcemia associated with granulomatous dis -
ease has been reported.
4.2 Viral diseases
4.2.1 Canine distemper
● Catarrhal or purulent exudate is present on the nasal 
and pharyngeal mucosa. Pururlent bronchopneumia is 
a prominent feature noted in animals. Hyperkeratosis

Diagnostic techniques of infectious diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 39  583
in foot pad. Conjuctivitis and encephalitis may also be 
observed. Abnormal hematologic findings include an 
absolute lymphopenia caused by lymphoid depletion. 
This frequently persists in very young dogs with rapidly 
progressive systemic or neurologic signs.
● Thrombocytopenia (as low as 30,000 cells/ μL) and re -
generative anemia have been found in experimentally 
infected neonates (aged less than 3  weeks) but have not 
been consistently recognized in older or spontaneously 
infected dogs.
● Intracytoplasmic or intranuclear inclusion bodies 
detected in desqumated cells of exudates. Intracyto -
plasmic distemper inclusions can be detected in the 
early phase of disease by examination of stained pe -
ripheral blood films, in some circulating neutrophils 
of affected dogs and less often in circulating lympho -
cytes, and with even less frequency in monocytes, and 
erythrocytes.
● Wright-Leishman-stained inclusions in lymphocytes are 
large (up to 3 μm), single, oval, gray structures, whereas 
erythrocytic inclusions (which are most numerous in 
polychromatophilic cells) are round and eccentrically 
placed and appear light blue.
● The sizes of erythrocytic inclusions are between those 
of metarubricyte nuclei and Howell-Jolly bodies.
● The magnitude and type of serum biochemistry changes 
in acute systemic infections are nonspecific.
● Total protein analysis includes decreased albumin and in-
creased α- and γ-globulin concentrations in non-neonates.
● Some puppies infected prenatally or neonatally with 
CDV have marked hypoglobulinemia from persistent 
immunosuppression caused by the virus.
Rabies (Hydrophobia/Lyssa/Rage)
● Diagnosis of rabies is based on symptoms if they are 
typical. No hematologic or serum biochemical changes 
are characteristic or specific for rabies.
● Biochemical changes in CSF have been minimal in 
experimentally infected dogs and have been rarely re -
ported in natural infections.
● Increased CSF protein (110–150  mg/dL) and leuko -
cytes (120–1140 cells/ μ L), with small lymphocytes 
predominating, have been reported in dogs with post -
vaccinal rabies encephalomyelitis. Fluorescent antibody 
test (FAT) on impression smears from the brain prefer -
able hippocampus, medulla oblongata and cerebellum. 
Intracytoplasmic inclusion bodies (Negri bodies) are 
observed in tissue section too.
● Feline panleukopenia: This disease is fatal febrile dis -
ease of feline, characterized by severe panleukopaenia, 
agraulocytosis, and intranuclear inclusion bodies in epi-
thelial of small intestine.
● Canine parvovirus 2: Cardiac form observed in pup -
pies of 2-8  weeks of age, with sudden death due to 
myocardial necrosis. Intestinal form observed in all 
age groups and is cahracterized by vomition, haem -
orrhagic and necrotic enteritis with leukopaenia. 
Intranuclear inclusion bodies are found in intestinal 
epithelial cells.
Infectious canine hepatitis:
● Early hematologic findings in ICH include leukopenia 
with lymphopenia and neutropenia.
● Neutrophilia and lymphocytosis occur later in dogs with 
uncomplicated clinical recovery.
● An increased number of dark-staining (activated) lym -
phocytes and nucleated erythrocytes may be found.
● Serum protein alterations, detectable only on serum 
electrophoresis, are a transient increase in α 2-globulin 
by 7  days postinoculation and by a delayed increase 
in γ-globulin, which peaks 21-day postinoculation. 
Albuminuria recorded in affected dogs. Elevated SGPT 
and SGOT level. Intranuclear inclusion bodies in tonsils 
and liver biopsy.
4.3 Fungal diseases
● Microsporum canis:  Ring worm, commonly seen in 
dogs and cats. Wood’s light- ultraviolet light in dark -
ened room, making it possible to recognize the mild 
infection.
● Blastomycosis
● On preliminary laboratory evaluation, a mild normo -
cytic, normochromic anemia develops that can be attrib-
uted to chronic inflammation.
● Most dogs have a moderate leukocytosis (17,000–30,000 
white blood cell count per microliter) with a mild left 
shift, and lymphopenia is common.
● They usually have hyperglobulinemia and hypoalbumin-
emia. The increased globulin concentrations are caused 
by an increase in α2-globulin and a polyclonal increase 
in immunoglobulins.
● The only other biochemical change that may be seen is 
hypercalcemia of granulomatous disease.
● Coccidiomycosis
● Hematologic changes may include mild nonregenerative 
anemia and moderate neutrophilic leukocytosis, often 
with a left shift and monocytosis.
● Eosinophilia of blood and cerebrospinal fluid (CSF), 
common in human coccidioidomycosis, is quite variable 
in animals.
● Hyperglobulinemia and hypoalbuminemia are common, 
reflecting a chronic, persistent inflammatory disease.
● Hypercalcemia unassociated with bone lesions has not 
yet been described in affected dogs or cats, but has been 
found with other systemic mycoses and in some human 
patients.

584 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
● An osteotrophic factor similar to that causing humoral 
hypercalcemia of malignancy has been postulated.
● Cryptococcosis
● Changes in the complete blood cell count and chemis -
try panel in animals with cryptococcosis are generally 
nonspecific.
● Mild-to-moderate nonregenerative anemia; leukocyto -
sis, often with monocytosis; and eosinophilia have been 
reported as the most common findings.
● Dogs with severe disseminated disease may have a 
marked neutrophilia with a left shift.
● The serum biochemical profile may reflect specific or -
gan involvement in patients with disseminated disease.
● Histoplasmosis
● The most common hematologic abnormality in both 
dogs and cats with disseminated histoplasmosis is nor -
mocytic, normochromic, nonregenerative anemia.
● The anemia probably results from chronic inflammatory 
disease, Histoplasma infection of the bone marrow, and 
intestinal blood loss in GI disease.
● Thrombocytopenia may be observed in as many 
as one-half of dogs and one-third of cats with 
histoplasmosis.
● Leukocyte counts are variable. Neutrophilic leukocy -
tosis with monocytosis and eosinopenia is found most 
frequently.
● Leukopenia has also been reported. In a survey of neu -
tropenic dogs, histoplasmosis was associated as a risk 
factor.
● Severe pancytopenia has been observed in some cats; no 
hematologic abnormalities were identified in others.
● Histoplasma organisms may be found during routine 
blood film examination in circulating monocytes, neu -
trophils, and, rarely, eosinophils.
● Performing 1000-cell differential counts or examining 
buffy coat smears will enhance detection of infected 
cells.
● Biochemical profiles are usually unremarkable in dogs 
with pulmonary histoplasmosis.
● Hypoalbuminemia is a fairly consistent finding in cats 
with disseminated histoplasmosis.
● Some cats have had hyperproteinemia, hyperglobulin -
emia, mild hyperglycemia or hyperbilirubinemia, and 
elevations of alanine aminotransferase activities.
● Dogs with disseminated disease may have hypopro -
teinemia with severe hypoalbuminemia as a result of 
intestinal blood loss or protein losing enteropathy. 
Involvement of the liver in affected dogs may cause 
hypoalbuminemia; hyperbilirubinemia; elevated serum 
alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase, 
and/or alkaline phosphatase activities; and abnormal re-
sults on liver function tests.
● Hypercalcemia (probably associated with granuloma -
tous disease) has been reported in several cats.
4.4 Other diseases
● Salmon disease of dogs: Disease is associated with in-
gestion of salmon, trout and other fish. Suffered dogs 
showed anorexia, vomition diarrohea. Postmortem 
examination showed enlarged lymphnode and spleen 
along with elementary bodies in reticulo-endothelial 
cells.
● Canine ehrlichiosis
● In the acute phase, typical hematologic abnormalities 
include a characteristic moderate-to-severe thrombocy -
topenia, a mild anemia, and leukopenia.
● The thrombocytopenia is the hallmark of the acute stage 
and is characterized by megathrombocytosis.
● The chronic form of is characterized by bone marrow 
hypoplasia and impairment of all bone marrow cells, 
thus resulting in pancytopenia.
● Granular lymphocytosis has been recognized as an oc -
casional feature of E. canis infection.
● Affected dogs had absolute lymphocyte counts ranging 
from 5200 to 17,200 cells/μL with cytoplasmic granular-
ity typical of well-differentiated lymphocytic leukemia.
● The most frequent serum chemistry abnormalities in -
clude hyperproteinemia, hyperglobulinemia, hypoal -
buminemia, and elevated alanine aminotransferase and 
alkaline phosphatase activities.
a. Anaplasmosis
4.5 Canine anaplasmosis infection
b. Hemobartonellosis
● Feline infectious anemia
■ Haemobartonella felis  organisms are only 
present in sufficient numbers to be easily rec -
ognized in stained blood films about 50% of 
the time during the acute phase of disease. 
Anaemia is revealed by pale, sometime icteric 
mucous membrane. haemoglobin levels usually 
decrease from a normal of 11 g/dL of blood to 
as low as 1.5 g/dL in severe cases.Level of 6.0 
g/dL of blood or lower considered typical of 
this disease. Macrocytosis, anisocytosis and re -
ticulocytosis are observed in blood smear.
■ The HCT is usually below 20% and frequently 
below 10% before clinical signs of disease are 
apparent to the client. At post mortem haemo -
lytic anaemia, jaundice, spleenomegaly and fatty 
changes are the prominent features.
● C. psittasi
■ Feline pneumonitis and rhinitis: acute upper respi-
ratory tract infection in cats. apart from this lesions 
may be found in lungs. Elementary bodies are noted 
in cytoplasm of epithelial and moncuclear cells.
● Trypanosomiasis

Diagnostic techniques of infectious diseases of dogs and cats  Chapter | 39  585
4.6 Dogs
● Hematologic changes during the course of infection in -
clude a decline in hematocrit with reticulocytosis and 
elevated mean corpuscular volume.
● The blood leukocyte count often decreases with neutro-
penia, lymphopenia, and eosinopenia and thrombocyto-
penia. In other cases, leukocytosis with neutrophilia has 
been noted.
4.7 Cats
● Infected cats developed mild-to-moderate reductions in 
erythrocyte count, hematocrit, and hemoglobin concen-
tration, with increases in circulating reticulocyte counts 
and reductions in the myeloid-to-erythroid ratio on bone 
marrow examination.
● Increased concentrations of serum total protein and 
globulins with decreased albumin concentrations were 
observed.
● Increased globulin concentrations were attributed to in -
creases in α-2 globulin, β-globulin, and γ-globulin con-
centrations through the course of illness.
● Serum muscle enzyme activities (aspartate aminotrans -
ferase and CK) were increased.
● Alterations in serum metal concentrations, blood, 
plasma, and brain cholinesterase activities, and plasma 
and erythrocyte lipid peroxidation were also found.
a. Coccidiosis
b. Neosporosis
● Hematologic and biochemical findings have 
been variable, depending on the organ system of 
involvement.
● With muscle disease, CK and aspartate aminotrans -
ferase activities have been increased. Serum ALT 
and alkaline phosphatase activities are increased in 
dogs that develop hepatic inflammation.
● CSF abnormalities have included mild increases in 
protein (over 20 but under 150  mg/dL) and nucle -
ated cell (over 10 but under 100 cells/dL) concen -
trations. Differential leukocyte counts, in decreasing 
numbers, included lymphocytes, monocytes and 
macrophages, neutrophils, and eosinophils. Thus, 
mononuclear cells seem to predominate.
● CSF analysis results can be within reference limits in 
some dogs.
● Eosinophilic pleocytosis has been observed in rare 
instances in dogs when N. caninum is present.
c. Toxoplasmosis
● Toxoplasmosis gondii infection
■ Routine hematologic and biochemical parameters 
may be abnormal in cats and dogs with acute sys-
temic toxoplasmosis.
■ Nonregenerative anemia, neutrophilic leukocyto -
sis, lymphocytosis, monocytosis, and eosinophilia 
are most commonly observed.
■ Leukopenia of severely affected cats may per -
sist until death and is usually characterized by 
an absolute lymphopenia and neutropenia with 
an inappropriate left shift, eosinopenia, and 
monocytopenia.
■ Biochemical abnormalities during the acute phase 
of illness include hypoproteinemia and hypoalbu-
minemia. Hyperglobulinemia has been detected in 
some cats with chronic toxoplasmosis.
■ Marked increases in serum alanine aminotransfer-
ase (ALT) and aspartate aminotransferase activi -
ties have been noted in animals with acute hepatic 
and muscle necrosis.
■ Dogs generally have increased serum ALT and al-
kaline phosphatase activities with hepatic necro -
sis, but this occurs less frequently in cats.
■ Serum creatine kinase (CK) activity is also in -
creased in cases of muscle necrosis.
■ Serum bilirubin levels have been increased in 
animals with acute hepatic necrosis, especially 
cats that develop cholangiohepatitis or hepatic 
lipidosis.
■ Cats or dogs that develop pancreatitis may show 
increased serum amylase and lipase activities, al -
though these are inconsistent.
■ Cats often show proteinuria and bilirubinuria.
■ Cats with pancreatitis may have reduced se -
rum total calcium with normal serum albumin 
concentrations
d. Babesiosis
● In dogs:
■ B. canis
■ B. gibsoni
● The clinical pathologic changes of babesiosis 
are nonspecific; the primary hematologic ab -
normalities are anemia and thrombocytopenia.
● The prevalence of thrombocytopenia is higher 
than that in dogs with ehrlichiosis, and throm -
bocytopenia is generally a feature of canine 
babesiosis, regardless of whether concurrent 
anemia is present.
● A mild, normocytic, normochromic anemia is 
generally noted in the first few days after infec-
tion, and the anemia then becomes macrocytic, 
hypochromic, and regenerative as the disease 
progresses.
● Leukocyte abnormalities are inconsistently ob-
served but may include leukocytosis (with or 
without a left shift), neutrophilia, neutropenia, 
lymphocytosis, eosinophilia, or leukopenia.

586 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
● There are no pathognomonic biochemical or 
urinalysis findings in dogs with babesiosis.
● Common biochemical findings observed in 
North American dogs with babesiosis in -
clude hyperglobulinemia and mildly increased 
liver enzyme activities and less commonly 
hyperbilirubinemia.
● Urinalysis abnormalities may include bilirubi -
nuria, hemoglobinuria, proteinuria, and, in rare 
cases, granular casts.
● Hypokalemia may be found in severely af -
fected animals but is probably nonspecific be -
cause of decreased potassium intake.
● In cats
■ B. felis
● In feline babesiosis, which is caused by B. felis, 
the anemia is typically macrocytic, hypochro -
mic, and regenerative.
● No characteristic change in total or differential 
leukocyte counts occurs, and thrombocytopenia 
is an inconsistent finding.
● Cats infected with B. felis typically have elevated 
serum hepatic aminotransferase enzyme activity 
and total bilirubin concentrations.
● Serum protein values are usually within reference 
limits, but polyclonal hyperglobulinemia can 
occur.
● Renal parameters are unaffected. Although vari -
ous electrolyte abnormalities were reported, no 
consistent pattern has been found.

587

Chapter 40
One Health approach of infectious 
diseases of dogs and cats
1 Introduction
A One Health approach considers how changing environ -
ments play a part in the risks of infectious and chronic dis -
eases that affect both people and nonhuman animals. One 
Health philosophy has been validated by recent cases of sick-
ness onset (Daszak et al., 2013). The expanding detrimental 
effects of zoonotic infections (those transmitted from animals 
to people) on both human and animal health have been made 
public by recent global disease outbreaks. Additionally, it is 
now well established that environmental changes, such as 
population expansion, agricultural intensification, climate 
change, and human encroachment on wildlife habitats, are 
the primary drivers of the introduction of many zoonotic ill-
nesses (Woolhouse and Gowtage-Sequeria, 2005).
The number of people is growing and settling in new 
areas. As a result, more people today have pets, livestock, 
and other domestic, wild animals living with them. Animals 
play a significant role in our life, whether it's for compan -
ionship, food, fiber, livelihoods, travel, sport, or education. 
When animals and humans come into close contact, there is 
a higher chance that diseases will be transmitted from one 
to the other. In addition, the earth's climate has changed as a 
result of land use practices including intensive farming and 
deforestation. International trade and travel have increased 
the movement of people, animals, and animal products, 
which can open up new opportunities for diseases to spread 
to animals. Therefore, diseases can quickly spread across 
international borders and around the globe. These changes 
have caused endemic and newly emerging zoonotic diseases 
to spread more widely. Zoonotic diseases afflict millions of 
people and animals annually all over the world (Fig. 1).
These zoonotic diseases caused by dogs include:
● Ringworm
● Salmonellosis
● Leptospirosis
● Lyme disease
● Campylobacter infection
● Giardia infection
● Cryptosporidium infection
● Roundworms
● Hookworms
● Tapeworms
● Scabies
● Harvest mites
● Rabies
Rabies, caused by Lyssa virus, is almost invariably fatal in 
humans. Certain infectious organisms, such as the bacteria 
Salmonella and Campylobacter and the protozoan disease 
caused by Giardia, can cause severe gastroenteritis. 
Leptospirosis, known as Weil's disease in people, can 
cause extremely serious liver and kidney disease but the 
transmission from dogs to humans is rare. Humans usually 
contract this disease from exposure to contaminated water.
Roundworms ( Toxocara canis ) and tapeworms 
(Echinococcus species) can cause liver problems, but illness 
in people from these causes is rare. Direct handling of in -
fected dog feces can potentially cause an infection of round-
worms in a susceptible person. Echinococcus tapeworm 
infections are starting to become more common in areas of 
Canada and the United States where they had not been rec-
ognized before (see handout “Echinococcosis in Dogs” for 
more information on this disease). Transmission to humans 
can result from ingestion of eggs released in an infected 
dog’s feces.
Zoonotic skin diseases including ringworm, caused 
by the fungus Microsporum canis and scabies, caused by 
the mite Sarcoptes scabiei, Cheyletiella mites, and harvest 
mites (Trombicula species) are transmitted relatively easily 
to people through direct physical contact.

588 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
2 Bordetella bronchiseptica
Bordetella bronchiseptica, a gram-negative rod-shaped bac-
teria, belong to the genus Bordetella and cause bronchitis. 
Animals with upper respiratory infections, such as dogs and 
cats, frequently carry the infection, which is transmitted to 
people by aerosol. Canines that have B. bronchiseptica can 
develop acute tracheobronchitis, which presents as a raspy, 
kennel cough-like cough. Although B. bronchiseptica infec-
tions in humans are relatively rare, pneumonia and upper 
respiratory infections can occur in dog owners who have 
the bacterium ( Ner et  al., 2003 ). This organism has been 
shown to be resistant to cephalosporins and macrolides, but 
multiple studies have shown that it is sensitive to fluoro -
quinolones and trimethoprim/sulfamethoxazole ( Egberink 
et al., 2009).
3 Brucella
It is frequently spread to people by eating unpasteurized 
dairy products. Many Brucella species have been identi -
fied, including B. melitensis, B. abortus, and B. suis, which 
caused human brucellosis. However, B. canis has received 
less attention as a common pathogen in human brucellosis 
infections (Seleem et al., 2010). Despite the fact that B. canis 
is not the cause of brucellosis in people, farmer populations 
that had a history of exposure to B. canis-infected canine 
bodily fluids were more frequently the target of reported 
cases. The incubation phase may continue for a few months 
or 1–4 weeks (Lucero et al., 2010).
In the endemic zone, the individuals may be asymptom-
atic or even exhibit severe clinical signs, such as fever, night 
sweats, and low back pain, which should be distinguished 
from tuberculosis and other cancers ( Hasanjani Roushan 
et al., 2004). In order to prevent the disease's consequences 
and after effects, brucellosis should be treated. Combination 
therapies, which are frequently used to treat brucellosis, in-
volved taking doxycycline along with either streptomycin 
or rifampin for 6 weeks (Table 1) (Pappas et al., 2005).
4 Campylobacter
Gram-negative bacteria called Campylobacter spp., notably 
Campylobacter jejuni and Campylobacter coli, commonly 
cause Campylobacter enteritis. This bacterium typically 
dwells in the digestive tracts of several mammals. The 
main way that Campylobacter is spread is through direct 
contact with diseased animals or their products. The main 
Campylobacter reservoirs are dogs and puppies. For in -
stance, a research found that Campylobacter was isolated 
from roughly 47% of the dog fecal sample ( Janda et  al., 
2006). Campylobacter enteritis has an incubation period 
of one to seven days. The majority of patients have fever, 
nausea, diarrhea, and stomach pain. Also, more than 50% 
of the infected patients may have bloody diarrhea. In some 
cases, convulsion and seizures may be seen ( Gazaigne 
et al., 2008). This illness typically resolves on its own and 
does not require antibiotic treatment. Consideration should 
be given to hydration and electrolyte balance correction. 
In individuals with severe illness, fluoroquinolone, macro -
lide, or aminoglycoside, antibiotic therapy is recommended 
(Ternhag et al., 2007).
5 Capnocytophaga
The oropharyngeal tract of dogs and cats normally con -
tains the gram-negative bacterium Capnocytophaga cani -
morsus. The pathogen, which primarily infects humans 
through dog bites, can result in a severe sepsis, especially 
in old, immunocompromised, or asplenic patients. The 
pathogen can also cause meningitis, osteomyelitis, arthritis, 
lung abscess or empyema, and endocarditis, all of which 
are deadly illnesses. Additionally, particularly in people 
FIG. 1 Diagram showing the One Health concept.
TABLE 1 Brucella species and their hosts.
Organism Host
B. melitensis Sheep, goat, and camel
B. abortus Buffalo, cows, and camels
B. canis Dog
B. suis Pig
B. neotomaei Rodent
B. ovis Sheep
B. pinnipediae Marine animals
B. cetaceae Marine animals

One Health approach of infectious diseases  Chapter | 40  589
with impaired immune systems, hemolytic uremic syn -
drome and thrombotic thrombocytopenic purpura can be 
linked to Capnocytophaga septicemia. The data from the 
literature have shown that the estimated mortality rate from 
Capnocytophaga septicemia is one-third of the infected pa-
tients. Therefore, third-generation cephalosporins should 
be used as early empirical therapy in individuals who have 
been bitten by a dog (Jolivet-Gougeon et al., 2007).
6 Coxiella burnetii
Humans get Q fever from the obligatory intracellular gram-
negative bacteria C. burnetii. Normally, the disease spreads 
to people by aerosols and direct contact with the bodily flu-
ids of infected animals. Despite the fact that dogs are not the 
primary carriers of C. burnetii, a study showed that about 
10% of farm dogs carried the pathogen ( Cosman et  al., 
2013). In addition, C. burnetii was found to be transferrable 
from an infected parturient dog to a human in a different 
investigation by Buhariwalla and colleagues. The patients 
also experienced the Q fever symptoms of fever, chills, 
nausea, vomiting, and a strong cough. In chest radiography, 
opacity is a frequent finding, and during auscultation during 
a physical examination, crackles may be audible. According 
to this investigation, the incubation period lasted between 
8 and 12 days following contact with the diseased animal. 
Fluoroquinolones or doxycycline are effective treatments 
for C. burnetii patients (Patel et al., 2011).
7 Rabies
The single-strand RNA virus that causes rabies is a mem -
ber of the Rhabdoviridae family. An old illness with a high 
fatality rate in both the human and animal populations is 
rabies infection. According to World Health Organization 
data, rabies infection causes between 30,000 and 70,000 
deaths globally each year ( Krebs et  al., 2004 ). The ma -
jority of rabies infections in animals are carried by dogs. 
While raccoons, bats, and foxes are the main sources of 
rabies transmission in industrialized countries, the major -
ity of infected people in underdeveloped countries contract 
the disease from dog bites. In a US study, a rabies control 
campaign was carried out by heavily immunizing house -
hold dogs and lowering the rabies infection. Depending on 
the site of the inoculating wound and the quantity of gen -
erated viruses, the incubation period for rabies can range 
from 4 days to several years. Agitation, anxiety, confusion, 
hallucinations, and hydrophobia are possible symptoms in 
patients. Within 14  days of the suspected dog bite, post -
exposure treatment with repeated doses of human rabies 
immunoglobulin (HRIG) can prevent the disease. The like-
lihood of contracting rabies can be drastically decreased 
by washing the wound with water and liquid soap ( Lucas 
et al., 2007).
8 Noroviruses
A heterogeneous single-strand RNA virus in the 
Caliciviridae family, noroviruses cause contagious diseases. 
Human sporadic and epidemic gastroenteritis is primarily 
brought on by noroviruses ( Summa et al., 2012 ). Humans 
of any age can be impacted by this virus. The virus can 
be discovered in the digestive system, and as a result, can 
be found in the feces or diarrhea of the affected canines. 
Humans can contract it from tainted food or water, and the 
infection spreads quickly among people due to fecal-oral 
route. Patients with acute gastroenteritis should think about 
receiving serum treatment (Wolf et al., 2009).
9 Leptospira
Leptospirosis in humans is mostly brought on by aerobic 
spirochete L. interrogans . Leptospirosis is a widespread 
zoonosis that is mostly spread to people via polluted en -
vironmental sources, such as contaminated soil, water, 
urine, or animal tissue. However, domestic animals, such as 
dogs, can play a significant role in leptospirosis transmis -
sion in endemic locations. Rodents are the main reservoirs 
for leptospirosis ( Moore et al., 2006 ). The primary routes 
of leptospirosis transmission involve mucosal surfaces of 
the human body, such as the eye, vagina, nose, mouth, or 
erosive lesions, which come into direct touch with contami-
nated urine. This infection typically takes around 10 days to 
incubate (ranging from 2 to 26 days). Numerous symptoms 
including fever, nonproductive cough, headache, muscu -
loskeletal discomfort, diarrhea, nausea, vomiting, alveolar 
hemorrhage, and even meningitis, can accompany leptospi-
rosis (Sehgal, 2006). Doxycycline, ceftriaxone, cefotaxime, 
penicillin, amoxicillin, and ampicillin are a few antibiotics 
that have been successfully used to treat this disease (Fig. 2) 
(Kobayashi, 2001).
10 Methicillin resistance Staphylococcus 
aureus
Methicillin resistance Staphylococcus aureus  (MRSA) is 
a common cause of infection-related death in people. This 
pathogen has reportedly been isolated from a variety of ani-
mals, including pigs, horses, cattle, cats, and dogs, according 
to several studies. Some of them had the opinion that com -
panion animals were the primary carriers of MRSA, as they 
could pass the infection to their owners directly. However, 
it appears that patients with impaired immune systems are 
more likely to contract MRSA from animals. However, 
other data suggested that this bacterium could spread to 
healthy people who own an affected animal. Treatment of 
infections brought on by MRSA does not improve with 
the use of conventional antistaphylococcal drugs. As a re -
sult, modern medications like  vancomycin,  linezolid, and

590 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
daptomycin are frequently used to treat MRSA infections 
(Morgan, 2008).
11 Pasteurella
Pasteurella species are gram-negative coccobacilli found 
mostly in animals. Pasteurella spp. are common bacte -
ria found in the upper respiratory tracts of dogs and cats. 
Pasteurella infection can be passed on to humans through 
both direct and indirect contact, such as dog or cat bites or 
licks, and even cat scratches ( Oehler et al., 2009 ). This or-
ganism is responsible for several infectious diseases in hu -
mans. The most common infection caused by it is soft tissue 
infection, meningitis, bone and joint infections, and respi -
ratory infections. The author showed that Pasteurella spp. 
was the most common organism recovered from dog and 
cat bites in a prospective research conducted in the United 
States ( Talan et  al., 1999 ). Second- and third-  generation 
cephalosporins, macrolides, fluoroquinolones, cotrimoxa -
zole, and penicillin can all be used to treat Pasteurella in-
fections (Lloret et al., 2013).
12 Salmonella
Salmonella species are anaerobic, mobile, gram-negative 
bacilli that thrive in the large intestine of many animals, 
particularly in the canine's mesenteric lymph nodes and 
the distal portion of the colon. Several infectious illnesses, 
including gastroenteritis, enteric fever, bacteremia, and os -
teomyelitis, can also infect humans through the digestive 
system (fecal transmission). The most frequent clinical 
manifestations of Salmonella in humans and dogs are gas -
trointestinal illnesses; however, the majorities of infected 
animals or people are asymptomatic and can shed the virus 
through feces for up to 6 weeks, which allows it to spread 
to other animals or people. Salmonella species are more 
common in developing countries than they are in developed 
ones. Salmonella infections should be treated with antibiot-
ics from different families, such as fluoroquinolones, beta-
lactams, and macrolides. However, an antibiogram should 
be taken into consideration for people who have the infec -
tion (Leonard et al., 2011).
13 Staphylococcus intermedius
S. intermedius is a gram-positive, coagulase-producing bac-
teria that often resides in the front of the nasal cavity of 
a variety of species, including dogs, pigeons, and horses. 
According to recent research, this pathogen might also be 
isolated from healthy dogs' gingiva ( Hoekstra and Paulton, 
2002). Although S. intermedius is not a typical zoonotic dis-
ease that affects humans, studies have shown that it is a pos-
sible pathogen linked to dog bite wounds and that cellulitis 
can occur in patients. It's crucial to differentiate this bacte -
rium from Staphylococcus aureus. Effective treatments for 
this infection include penicillin and amoxicillin-clavulanate 
(Armstrong et al., 2004).
14 Yersinia enterocolitica
A gram-negative coccobacillus zoonotic pathogen called Y. 
enterocolitica causes yersiniosis in both humans and animals. 
Birds, pigs, deer, and cattle are a few of the major Y. entero-
colitica reservoirs. In some investigations, the pathogen was 
isolated from dog bite wound. When the pathogen invades 
the mucosal surface of the colon, patients may first show no 
symptoms. However, watery or bloody diarrhea may then ap-
pear. Additionally, the infection may involve Peyer's patches 
and exhibit symptoms of appendicitis ( Abdel-Haq et  al., 
2000). Most cases of Y. enterocolitica are self-limited and do 
not require antibiotic treatment; however, patients with severe 
infection and those who are immunocompromised should be 
treated with an aminoglycoside and doxycycline together.
15 Zoonotic diseases of cats
Infections caused by viruses, bacteria, fungi, protozoa, 
nematodes, or arthropods that can be spread to people by 
domestic cats, Felis catus. Some of these illnesses are in -
festations or re-emerging infections brought on by zoonotic 
pathogens spread by cats. The cat may occasionally show 
signs of infection and other times the cat may not show any 
symptoms. People who contract an infection may  experience 
severe diseases and clinical symptoms. This is based on the 
7UDQVPLVVLRQRFFXUVE\
FRQWDFWZLWKFRQWDPLQDWHG
VRLOZDWHUSODQWE\XULQH
(QWHUVKXPDQERG\WKURXJK
DEUDGHGVNLQRUWKURXJK
PXFRXVPHPEUDQH
(QWHUVWKHEORRGVWUHDPDQG
FDXVHVGDPDJHWRWKHLQQHU
OLQLQJRIEORRGYHVVHOV
6SUHDGWRDOOWKHRUJDQVRI
WKHERG\
&DXVLQJLVFKHPLFGDPDJH
WROLYHUNLGQH\PHQLQJHV
DQGPXVFOHV
FIG. 2 Diagram showing the pathophysiology of Leptospira.

One Health approach of infectious diseases  Chapter | 40  591
person's age and immune system. These infections are more 
likely to affect people who live near cats. However, due to 
the transmission from cat excrement and other bodily se -
cretions, people who do not own cats as pets are equally 
susceptible to contracting these illnesses (Chomel, 2014).
Through cat bites, scratches, or other direct skin or mu-
cous membrane contact, people can contract cat-associated 
illnesses. This includes giving an animal a “kiss” or allow -
ing it to lick your mouth or nose. When the cat's mouth is 
exposed to the virus, mucous membranes are quickly af -
fected. When human contact is made with animal saliva, 
urine, or other bodily fluids or secretions, pathogens can 
also infect the human host. Infection may result from acci -
dentally ingesting fecal particles. An individual can contract 
a feline zoonosis by breathing in aerosols or droplets vom -
ited up by the cat (Stull et al., 2015).
Cats with certain infectious illnesses, including salmo -
nellosis and campylobacteriosis, exhibit outward signs of 
illness. Some illnesses, such toxoplasmosis and cat scratch 
disease, go undetected and are spread by cats that appear to 
be healthy.
16 Campylobacteriosis
Campylobacteriosis is a disease caused by the bacteria 
Campylobacter that can affect both humans and animals. 
People can contract Campylobacter infection through in -
gesting tainted food or water or by coming into contact 
with the feces (poop) of infected animals, including cats. 
Campylobacter can sometimes infect you through an open 
wound, but it usually spreads when individuals don't wash 
their hands after handling animals, food, feces, toys, or 
beds. Cats frequently contract the disease by consuming 
tainted raw meat, and they then excrete the bacteria in their 
feces.
Anyone can contract Campylobacter, but those under 
the age of 5, those over 65, and those with compromised 
immune systems are more likely to develop serious sick -
ness. Cats may seem healthy and exhibit no symptoms of 
Campylobacter infection, or they may have bloody diar -
rhea. Fever, stomach cramps, and diarrhea (frequently 
bloody) can all occur in people. V omiting and nausea may 
also be present along with the diarrhea. Typically, symp -
toms appear 2–5 days after infection and remain for around 
a week (Ohio Department of Health, 2015).
17 Cat scratch disease (Bartonella 
henselae)
Bartonella henselae and, less frequently, other Bartonella 
species are the bacteria that cause cat scratch disease 
(CSD). Cats can contract the disease from flea bites, blood 
transfusions, or fights with other affected cats. The germs 
can spread to people when they lick or scratch an infected 
cat. The bacteria are most likely to be present in young cats 
(under 1 year of age), stray or shelter cats, cats that are cur-
rently or have previously had flea infestations, and cats that 
hunt. Anyone can contract CSD, although those under the 
age of 15 and those with compromised immune systems are 
more likely to become ill than healthy individuals.
Cats have been exposed to the germs between one-third 
and 50% of the time. Even while the majority of infected 
cats do not show symptoms, some cats may have a mod -
erate sickness with a temperature that lasts for around 
2–3  days. Rarely, the illness can make cats exhibit more 
severe symptoms like vomiting, red eyes, enlarged lymph 
nodes, exhaustion, and/or decreased appetite. Compared to 
cats, Bartonella infection in dogs is less common but more 
likely to result in sickness.
The CSD bacteria may cause a mild infection with 
a small, raised, solid bump at the site of the scratch and 
lymph node swelling near the site of the scratch. This oc -
curs 1–3 weeks after exposure (e.g., a cat scratch or lick). 
The infection can also cause fever, and less commonly eye 
infection, muscle pain, or more severe symptoms.
18 Cat tapeworm (Dipylidium caninum)
The cat tapeworm is a parasite transferred to dogs, cats, and 
people through the consumption of infected fleas. Although 
this parasite is widespread in cats, it rarely makes pets or 
people sick. When a cat or person swallows an infected flea, 
the tapeworm is disseminated. When cats brush themselves, 
fleas may be ingested. Pet flea treatment can assist avoid 
infection. Being infected by this tapeworm requires swal -
lowing a flea, thus the chance of contracting it is incredibly 
rare. The majority of cases involve kids.
In most cases, cats are not harmed by tapeworms, and 
they rarely make them sick. Sometimes the parasite can be 
identified by looking for tapeworm segments that resem -
ble rice crawling close to the anus or in recently excreted 
feces. A dog may lose weight if it has a severe infection. 
People seldom get Dipylidium  infections, which typically 
have no symptoms. The presence of tapeworm segments 
that resemble rice crawling close to the anus or in recently 
excreted matter might occasionally serve as a sign of this 
disease.
19 Cryptosporidiosis (Cryptosporidium 
spp.)
The parasite Cryptosporidium, also known as Crypto for 
short, is the source of the sickness known as cryptosporidi-
osis, which is contracted by unintentionally ingesting an 
infected person's or animal's feces. Following contact with 
an infected person or animal, crypto is spread by eating 
stool carrying the germ or by poop in contaminated food or 
water. For instance, ingesting potable water for recreation,

592 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
 consuming unclean water from a lake or river, or touching 
their mouth after handling an infected animal can all result 
in Crypto infection?
Anyone can contract Crypto, but those with compro -
mised immune systems are more vulnerable, especially to 
severe illness. Although it is uncommon, cats might occa -
sionally carry the parasite without displaying any symptoms 
of sickness. Constant, watery diarrhea with cramps, nausea, 
vomiting, and abdominal discomfort are some symptoms. 
Usually, the symptoms resolve after 1–2 weeks.
20 Giardiasis (Giardia duodenalis)
Giardia is a parasite that can be found on surfaces, in food, 
water, or soil that has come into contact with human or ani-
mal waste. Giardia is spread by drinking contaminated wa-
ter or eating contaminated food that has been contaminated 
with the parasite's tiny excrement after coming into touch 
with an infected person or animal. Giardia can be con -
tracted from cats with very little risk. Typically, the specific 
strain of Giardia that sickens humans is not the same one 
that affects cats. Giardia can affect everyone, although the 
following populations are at higher risk:
● individuals who travel internationally;
● those who come into touch with young toddlers wearing 
diapers;
● those who engage in sexual activity with a Giardia-
infected person;
● individuals who consume untreated water from a spring, 
lake, river, or other natural water source.
Giardia-infected cats may experience diarrhea, oily feces, 
or dehydration. Giardia can cause nausea, vomiting, ab -
dominal pain, diarrhea, gas, and other symptoms. It is possi-
ble to be infected, nevertheless, yet not show any symptoms 
of sickness. 
21 Hookworm (Ancylostoma 
tubaeforme, Ancylostoma braziliense, 
Uncinaria stenocephala)
Small worms called hookworms can spread when they 
come into touch with contaminated sand or soil. People can 
contract hookworm illness by sitting, kneeling, or walking 
barefoot on ground that has been contaminated with ani -
mal feces. Cats can contract the parasite by consuming it in 
the environment or through the milk or colostrum of their 
mothers.
A hookworm infection can affect anyone. Hookworm 
infections in kittens can be fatal, and they can also result 
in anemia and weight loss. When a person has hookworm 
infection, they may develop an itching reaction and develop 
a red squiggly line where the parasite larvae have moved 
under the skin. Animal hookworms do not survive in an in-
fected person, in contrast to human hookworms, therefore 
symptoms usually go away on their own in 4–6 weeks with-
out the need for medical attention.
22 MRSA (methicillin-resistant 
Staphylococcus aureus)
Common bacteria like Staphylococcus aureus are typically 
found on both human and animal skin. MRSA is a strain 
of Staphylococcus aureus that has developed an antibiotic 
resistance. Skin infections, pneumonia (lung infections), 
and other illnesses can all be brought on by MRSA. Direct 
interaction between humans and animals can result in the 
transmission of MRSA (touching). MRSA can be carried by 
cats who are healthy and transferred to people.
A MRSA infection can strike anyone. Although skin, 
respiratory, and urinary tract infections are all common in 
cats, MRSA infection is not always visible in them. The 
majority of MRSA carriers do not exhibit any symptoms. 
The most typical form of MRSA infection in people is a 
cutaneous infection. Rarely can MRSA spread to the lungs 
or bloodstream and become life-threatening if untreated.
23 Plague (Yersinia pestis)
Yersinia pestis, a bacterium that may infect humans and 
animals, is what causes the plague. Fleas can spread the 
infection to rats and other small animals in the western 
United States. People and animals (dogs and cats) that are 
bitten by infected fleas are at risk. Cats and dogs are both 
capable of contracting the plague and passing it on to peo -
ple. The majority of flea-related illnesses affect both hu -
mans and animals; however, contact with animals that have 
the plague can also make people ill. A sick cat's coughing 
up infectious droplets into the air can also expose people 
to the disease.
Travelers and residents of rural areas, may be at risk. 
Additionally, those who have animal contact (such as 
those who sleep with pets) and hunters may be in danger. 
Particularly vulnerable to the pandemic are cats. Fevers, 
poor appetites, lack of energy, and swollen lymph nodes on 
their necks that can resemble wounds are some of the symp-
toms of plague in cats. Cats who have plague pneumonia 
may cough or have breathing problems.
To lower the risk of human illness, owners should limit 
human contact with sick pets and seek veterinarian care as 
soon as possible. The most prevalent type of plague among 
humans is bubonic. Bubonic plague symptoms include 
painful, enlarged lymph nodes, high fever that appears out 
of nowhere, chills, headache, and weakness. More severe 
symptoms may result from other types of plague, such as 
septicemic plague and plague pneumonia.

One Health approach of infectious diseases  Chapter | 40  593
24 Rabies
Cat owners should get cats vaccinated against rabies. Rabies 
spreads through contact with saliva or brain/nervous system 
tissue from an infected animal, usually through scratches or 
bites. Rabies is a prevalent disease in India in both wild and 
domestic animals.
Progressive paralysis and abrupt behavioral changes 
are frequent in cats with rabies. Additionally, they might 
be agitated, pant, or they might even attack other animals, 
humans, or things. Usually, rabies symptoms in animals are 
followed by death within a few days. People can develop 
rabies symptoms days to months after exposure. If a person 
has been bitten by a cat, there should be immediate washing 
of the wound followed by post bite vaccination.
25 Ringworm
Ringworm is an infection brought on by a fungus that can 
affect both human and animal skin, hair, and nails. Direct 
physical contact (touching) with an animal or human who 
has ringworm or environmental exposure are the two ways 
that it spreads. Ringworm can affect anyone. While some 
cats with ringworm infections may not exhibit any symp -
toms, others frequently develop small patches of scaly or 
crusty skin and hair loss around their ears, faces, or legs. 
The most frequent victims are kittens.
People who have ringworm infections often have itchy 
skin, which can happen anywhere on the body. The skin 
may become red, scale, crack, or develop a ring-shaped 
rash. Hair loss may occur whether the infection is on the 
beard or the scalp. Infected nails may develop a discolor -
ation, grow thick, or collapse.
26 Roundworms (Toxocara spp.)
Toxocariasis is an infection that is brought on by round -
worm, a parasite. Cats' intestines frequently contain round-
worms. In their feces, cats excrete roundworm eggs. By 
ingesting roundworm eggs from the environment, such as 
dirt tainted with cat excrement, people and cats are sus -
ceptible to developing roundworms. Roundworms are con-
tagious and can infect anyone. The majority of the time, 
kittens do not appear unwell, but those that do may exhibit 
signs such as minor diarrhea, dehydration, a rough coat, and 
a pot-bellied appearance.
There are two types of illness associated with round -
worms in people. Ocular toxocariasis happens when round-
worm larvae migrate to the eye and can cause vision loss, 
eye inflammation, or damage to the retina. Typically, only 
one eye is affected. Visceral toxocariasis happens when the 
roundworm larvae migrate to various body organs (like the 
liver, lungs, or central nervous system) and can cause fever, 
fatigue, coughing or wheezing, or abdominal pain.
27 Salmonellosis (Salmonella spp.)
Salmonella organisms, which are most frequently 
spread through contaminated food, cause salmonellosis. 
Salmonella can also transfer from humans to cats and from 
humans to other humans.
By consuming contaminated food or coming into con -
tact with animal waste, people might catch an infection. 
Salmonella can infect cats when they consume infected ro -
dents, birds, or pet food, particularly raw pet food. Anyone 
can contract a Salmonella infection, but those with com -
promised immune systems, those over 65, and children un-
der the age of 5 are more likely to develop serious disease. 
Typically, adult cats don't exhibit symptoms of illness. Cats 
who are infected could develop diarrhea. Diarrhea, fever, 
and cramping are possible symptoms. Symptoms often ap -
pear 6 h to 4 days after infection and continue 4–7 days.
28 Sporotrichosis (Sporothrix spp.)
An infection known as sporotrichosis is brought on by a 
fungus. The fungus normally enters the body through a 
cut or scrape in the skin, but it has also been linked to ani -
mal bites or scratches, notably those from cats. Anyone is 
susceptible to contracting sporotrichosis, but those who 
work with plant material (such moss, roses, or hay) or 
come into contact with diseased animals are particularly 
vulnerable. People who have compromised immune sys -
tems are more susceptible to infection, especially dissem -
inated diseases.
Sporotrichosis in cats can range from having no symp -
toms to becoming a deadly condition. Small draining 
wounds that later become elevated lumps when the surface 
is worn away are frequently the first symptoms. The condi-
tion may then get worse.
The location of the fungus's growth affects the sporotri-
chosis symptoms.
● Cutaneous (skin) form: 1–12  weeks after exposure, a 
tiny, painless lump first appears. The bump, which may 
be red, pink, or purple, enlarges until it resembles an 
open sore or ulcer that heals very slowly. The original 
bump may be followed by others.
● Disseminated form: The infection in this form damages 
the bones and internal organs.
● Pulmonary form: signs and symptoms include fever, 
chest discomfort, shortness of breath, and cough. The 
pulmonary and disseminated types:
29 Tick-borne diseases
Pets are susceptible to infections spread by ticks, such as 
Lyme disease, tularemia, ehrlichiosis, babesiosis, and other 
illnesses. A veterinarian should be consulted by pet  owners

594 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
to determine the best tick prevention methods for their ani-
mals. The risk of tick-borne illnesses for both you and your 
pets can be decreased by treating pets for ticks. The bite 
of an infected tick allows the transmission of tick-borne 
pathogens. Small amounts of saliva are secreted by the tick 
into the animal's or person's skin during the feeding pro -
cess. Tick exposure is a possibility for people and animals 
that spend time in tick habitat (grassy, forested, or brushy 
environments). Ticks can be found in and around the ears, 
eyelids, beneath collars, between the back legs, between the 
toes, and around the tail of cats.
To limit the risk of sickness, rapidly remove ticks from 
pets. Depending on the type of infection, the symptoms 
of tick-borne disease in pets might vary, or they may not 
exhibit any symptoms at all. People might have a variety 
of symptoms from tick-borne infections, but they typically 
include fever, chills, body aches, and occasionally a rash. 
Some tick-borne illnesses can be fatal or extremely serious. 
If you have been exposed to tick habitat or have been bit -
ten by a tick and exhibit any of these symptoms, consult a 
healthcare professional (Table 2).
30 Toxoplasmosis (Toxoplasma gondii)
To limit the risk of sickness, rapidly remove ticks from pets. 
Depending on the type of infection, the symptoms of tick-
borne disease in pets might vary, or they may not exhibit 
any symptoms at all. A parasite that can be found in soil, 
water, meat, or the feces of infected animals, especially 
cats, causes the disease toxoplasmosis.
People can contract toxoplasmosis by eating under -
cooked meat or shellfish or by coming into touch with cat 
excrement. By consuming infected rodents, birds, or other 
small animals, cats catch the disease. Once the parasite has 
shed, it contaminates the surroundings or the cat's litter box 
by dispersing in the cat's feces. Consuming tainted food or 
water can cause an infection in a person. People can con -
tract the illness if they don't wash their hands after touching 
cat waste or cleaning a cat's litter box.
Toxoplasmosis can affect anyone, but those with com -
promised immune systems are more prone to have severe 
sickness. Infected pregnant women can transmit the parasite 
to their unborn child, which may cause birth abnormalities. 
Although cats with toxoplasmosis rarely show symptoms, 
the parasite can persist in feces for up to 3 weeks after in -
fection. Toxoplasmosis usually has no symptoms in healthy 
persons, but in rare cases, ocular illness or mild flu-like 
symptoms may appear. Toxoplasmosis can cause more se -
vere problems, such as brain damage, in people with com -
promised immune systems. Due to the possibility of birth 
abnormalities, pregnant women who may have been ex -
posed should speak with their doctor.
31 Tularemia (Francisella tularensis)
Francisella tularensis bacteria are the cause of the disease 
tularemia. Although it can infect dogs and cats, it is primar-
ily seen in small mammals like rabbits and rodents. Tick 
bites, contact with infected animals, breathing in the germs, 
and contaminated food or water are all ways that the bac -
teria might spread. Cats can contract the disease from tick 
bites, eating or killing infected rodents or small mammals, 
or both. Infections can also spread to people through cat 
bites and scratches.
Anyone can contract tularemia, but those who spend a 
lot of time in the great outdoors, go hunting, or prepare and 
butcher wild game are more likely to come into contact with 
the F . tularensis bacteria. Yellowed eyes, tiredness, lymph 
gland swelling, fever, and other symptoms of infection can 
all occur in infected cats. Tularemia manifests itself in sev-
eral ways in humans. The most typical symptoms of infection 
are fever, ulceration, and swollen lymph nodes. Chills, head-
aches, joint discomfort, muscular aches, and weakness are 
some other symptoms. The respiratory system, throat, and 
eyes can all become infected with the F . tularensis bacteria.
32 Prevention
Proper litter box cleaning is the most effective way to reduce 
the risk of contracting a zoonotic disease from your cat. 
Litter box should be places away from the kitchen and/or 
food storage areas. Furthermore, use of disposable  litter box 
liners also helps. The litter should not be dumped  because 
TABLE 2 Vector-borne zoonotic diseases of canine and 
feline.
Disease Vector
Leishmaniosis Sand fly
Bartonellosis Flea, tick
Borreliosis Tick
Ehrlichiosis Tick
Rickettsiosis Tick, flea
Anaplasmosis Tick
Dirofilariasis Mosquito
Yersiniosis Flea
Tularemia Tick
Tick-borne encephalitis Tick
Louping ill Tick
Coxiellosis Tick
West Nile virus encephalitis Mosquito
Trypanosomiasis Triatoma bugs

One Health approach of infectious diseases  Chapter | 40  595
it could potentially aerosolize an infectious agent. The litter 
box should be cleaned at least twice a month with hot wa -
ter, letting the hot water stand in the box for at least 5  min. 
This simple cleaning technique will kill the Toxoplasma 
organism. Pet owners should thoroughly wash hands after 
cleaning the litter box, post pet grooming or bathing. The 
bedding material of pets should be separate. Animal and in-
sect bites should be avoided. The pets should be vaccinated 
against diseases such as rabies.
33 Conclusion
The interdisciplinary obstacles that currently exist between 
ecological, evolutionary, and environmental sciences and 
human and veterinary medicine must be removed for this 
One Health idea to succeed. Although it rarely happens, all 
domestic animals, including dogs, cats, birds, horses, cows, 
sheep, goats, and rabbits, have the potential to transmit 
diseases to humans. The majority of these possible infec -
tions can be prevented if pet owners practice fundamental 
hygiene standards, including hand washing.

597

Chapter 41
Prevention and control of infectious 
diseases
1 Introduction
Infectious disease is defined as an illness due to a pathogen 
or its toxic product, which arises through transmission from 
an infected person, an infected animal, or a contaminated 
inanimate object to a susceptible host ( Van Seventer and 
Hochberg, 2017). The management of infectious diseases 
can be achieved only by understanding the determining 
factors of the transmission of disease. The likelihood of 
a disease occurrence in a population is nearly inevitable. 
Nevertheless, the probability of an animal contracting a dis-
ease when exposed to an agent depends upon the dynamic 
relationship between the host, agent, and the environment.
The word prevention originated from the Latin word 
“preventionem” which stands for action of stopping or 
anticipation. “Prevention” is a highly valued term from a 
clinician’s perspective in the context of infectious disease. 
Unlike the other clinical maladies, a disease caused by an 
infectious agent can be prevented and kept under control 
when appropriate measures are taken. Control measures 
play a vital role in limiting the spread of an infectious dis -
ease. Prevention strategies aim at severing the bridge of 
transmission of the agents and their relationship with the 
host and environment. Therefore, control of a disease is an 
amalgam of continuous disease surveillance, monitoring 
when in a state of an outbreak, adapting appropriate mitiga-
tion strategies to control the transmission and selection of 
necessary treatment. The chapter will cover factors influ -
encing prevention of a disease, nature of canine and feline 
populations, the relationship between pathogen/agent-host-
environment, role of vaccinations, and control strategies in 
case of an outbreak in dog and cat populations.
2 Domesticated populations
Canines and felines are the top domesticated animals in the 
world. They have also gained importance in the society. 
Hence, the infectious diseases that affect them tend to have 
an indirect impact on humans as well as the community.
2.1 Canine population
The domesticated dog ( Canis familiaris) has a worldwide 
distribution with a population size of 700 million around 
the globe ( Hughes and Macdonald, 2013 ). Dogs can be 
owned, i.e., they are under the ownership of humans and 
depend on them for food, shelter, and movement. Whereas 
the second type is unowned (stray) one they do not have hu-
man supervision but indirectly depends on humans to fulfill 
their needs (Matter et al., 2000). Irrespective of the type of 
ownership both groups are equally susceptible to infections. 
Major infectious diseases affecting the canine population 
are Parvo viral enteritis, canine distemper, infectious canine 
hepatitis, leptospirosis, rabies, kennel cough, etc. Most in -
fectious diseases are preventable with appropriate measures. 
For example, Parvo viral enteritis has a sporadic occurrence 
that is again dependent on many factors, like immunity sta-
tus, stress factors, age, geographical distribution, strain, etc. 
The disease is completely preventable with immunization. 
Therefore, when there is an outbreak, the infection needs to 
be properly contained and controlled to limit the repercus -
sion and transmission.
In general, the dog populations have the same kind of 
characteristics, viz. management, housing, and husbandry; 
hence, the type of shortcomings in the prevention strategies 
is also similar. The prevention strategies to combat infec -
tious diseases are elaborated in the latter part.
2.2 Feline population
The feline population is generally categorized into two 
based on their housing and ownership, confined cats and 
non-confined cats. Confined cats are strictly reared indoors 
and are under ownership. Whereas non-confined or free-
roaming cats are semi-owned or unowned (Bradshaw et al., 
1999). Strictly confined cats are highly socialized and their 
health is continuously monitored by owners. Semi-owned 
cats are free-roaming they do not completely depend upon 
one owner for food or shelter, in such condition’s owners

598 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
become unaware of the health issues or history of exposure 
to pathogens. They tend to roam in small colonies and live 
where there is availability of food. Felines form a colony 
of three or more sexually mature cats living and feeding 
in close proximity ( Slater, 2005). Though they live among 
humans they tend to have strong wild instincts. The ma -
jor difference in such a free-roaming population from that 
of single-ownership pets is that owners may extend some 
comfort, food, shelter, and emergency care, but they hardly 
provide adequate protection against infections, neither pro-
vide parasite control nor vaccinations. Another important 
concern with feline populations is that they are seasonally 
polyoestrus and are induced ovulators. The chances of preg-
nancy are alarmingly high throughout the year (Deag et al., 
2000). Infant mortality and morbidity due to infectious dis-
eases are high among cats. The major infectious diseases 
affecting cats are feline infectious peritonitis, feline leuke -
mia virus infection, feline immunodeficiency virus infec -
tion, and feline respiratory disease. Most infectious diseases 
are preventable yet for most unowned or semi-owned cats 
the prognosis are grave. When an owner no longer wants to 
take the ownership, they rather abandon them in the streets, 
under the notion that their welfare is better when they are 
unowned rather than in shelter homes.
3 Factors influencing infectious diseases 
progression and its prevention
The seven factors that influence infectious disease progres-
sion and its prevention are host, pathogen, transmission, 
methods of transmission, environment, maintenance of dis-
ease and immunoprophylaxis (Fig. 1).
3.1 Hosts
Hosts are the living organisms which harbor the infectious 
agent and can support the sustenance of the agent. They 
are an essential part of a disease cycle. The development 
of the agent occurs in the host. The host’s susceptibility or 
infectiousness depends upon its ability to spread or transmit 
the diseases. For example, dogs are generally susceptible to 
parvo-viral enteritis, and they transmit the disease to other 
dogs. The susceptibility within a species depends upon the 
age, immunity status and the influencing environmental sta-
tus. Canine parvo viral enteritis is commonly transmitted 
among the nonimmunized pups of the age group 3  weeks 
to 6 months. An animal does not have the ability to transfer 
the infectious agent as soon as in its infected by an agent, 
such a period, i.e., a period between the entry of the organ-
ism/agent to the period of excretion of the agent is referred 
to as prepatent period (parasite), eclipse phase (virus), and 
latent period (bacterium). The period between the exposure 
of the organism to the period of clinical demonstration of 
the disease refers to incubation period. There are different 
types of hosts (Fig. 2):
Definitive hosts/final host : A host in which the sexual 
stages of development of an infectious agent takes place. 
They are often the last link in a dynamic process, e.g., 
Taenia pisiforms in dogs.
Primary host : A host which helps in the maintenance 
of infectious agent in a population. Infectious agent relies 
of the primary host for existence therefore also known as 
maintenance host, e.g., dogs infected with distemper virus.
Secondary host: It is a susceptible host that are addition-
ally involved in the life cycle of an infectious agent. They 
are also called as aberrant hosts.
Paratenic host: A host which mechanically transfers an 
agent. They do not take part in any developmental stages of 
the life cycle. This term is usually used in helminthology.
Intermediate host: A host in which agent undergoes de-
velopmental stages before it moves to the final host, fre -
quently in an asexual reproduction, e.g., larval stages of 
Ctenocephalides spp. are the intermediate host for the tape-
worm infestation in dogs.
Amplifier host: A host in which the infectious agent mul-
tiply abundantly. The host remains asymptomatic through -
out the cycle.
Hibernating host: A host in which the infectious agent 
remains dormant without multiplication, e.g., hibernating 
snakes infected with Japanese encephalitis virus.
Incidental (dead-end or accidental) host : A host that 
harbors the agent but do not transmit it to the other hosts.
Biological vector : A animal (usually an arthropod) in 
which an infectious agent undergoes either a developmental 
stage or its multiplication before its transmission to definite 
host, e.g., ticks in anaplasma infection in dogs.
3.2 Pathogen
A pathogen is defined as an organism causing disease to a 
host. Pathogens are diverse and comprises of virus, bacteria 
FIG. 1 Factors influencing infectious diseases progression and its prevention.

Prevention and control of infectious diseases  Chapter | 41  599
as well as unicellular and multicellular eukaryotes (Balloux 
and van Dorp, 2017). The three main characteristics of the 
pathogen are infectivity, virulence, and stability. Infectivity 
is the proportion of the organism required to cause a disease 
in the host. It varies from a host to host, as the host’s immu-
nity come into play when exposed to an infectious agent. It 
also depends upon the strains of the pathogen. The infective 
dose of a particular pathogen affecting more than one spe -
cies can be different.
Infectivity is quantified in terms of the infectious dose 
50 (ID50), the amount of agent required to infect 50% of a 
specified host population. This proves that the infectivity 
of a pathogen can only be explained in relation with the 
hosts. Virulence is defined as the ability of the pathogen to 
infect the host and cause the disease ( Sharma et al., 2017). 
Virulence reflect the biochemical properties of the pathogen 
pertaining to its ability to produce toxins, cell proteins, im-
mune response inhibitors, adhesion, colonization, and inva-
sion. Stability refers to the length of the time a pathogen 
can survive outside in body of the host. Some pathogens 
can stabilize themselves only for a short period and are very 
labile, e.g., spirochetes—Leptospira. Whereas some patho-
gens can survive in the environment for longer period due to 
their adaptive mechanisms, e.g., Bacillus anthracis.
3.3 Transmission
Transmission is the transfer of pathogenic organisms from 
one host to the other. The infectious agent leaves the host 
through a portal of exit and enter the next susceptible host 
through a portal of entry. Infectious diseases can be trans -
mitted from host–host through a plethora of mechanisms in-
cluding direct-aerosol, bite, transplacental, transmammary 
indirect-airborne, vector-borne, and intermediate hosts. The 
cornerstone of epidemiology is to prevent the spread of the 
infectious agent from host to host. Further, prevention of 
any type of contact which may result in disease transmis -
sion is a more pragmatic way to handle a disease outbreak.
The significant elements in population medicine are 
their density, movement, environmental management, and 
breeding stock. The population density is the number of 
individuals within a species in a specific geographic lo -
cale, in this context, it means the number of individuals in 
a population in a particular area/cage/house. For example, 
for an adult Dalmatian dog, the minimum floor space re -
quirement required is 9.51  ft.2, when housing a group of 
animals, the floor space should meet or exceed the mini -
mum requirement to ensure good welfare ( Normando 
et  al., 2014 ). The second element is animal movement, 
despite the rules and regulations laid down by the World 
Organization for Animal Health (WOAH) the legal and il -
legal transport of animals both livestock and exotic ones 
have led to many outbreaks of infectious diseases. Since 
animal movement is not as easier as human movement 
there is still hope to control the contact or the spread of dis-
ease. There are pieces of evidence that points to the spread 
of diseases due to the animal movement. Infections asso -
ciated with heartworm ( Dirofilaria immitis ), ehrlichiosis 
(Ehrlichia canis ), echinococcosis ( Echinococcus granu -
losus and E. multilocularis ), babesiosis ( Babesia canis ), 
and leishmaniosis have a high probability to transfer with 
the movement of domestic pets into the United Kingdom 
and to many other countries ( Trotz-Williams and Trees, 
2003; Ferroglio et al., 2005). The unknown spread of these 
above-mentioned infections happened due to a lack of 
necessary preventive measures including usage of anthel -
minthic, insecticide-treated collars, and lack of screening 
for endemic infections before pet travel. The third element 
is the environmental management of the facilities to which 
the population is exposed.
FIG. 2 Types of hosts.

600 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
For instance, if a dog or a cat is exposed to the high mois-
ture content from improper drying of the skin coat, there 
is a high probability of fungal or yeast infections, contact 
dermatitis, etc. Similarly, in the case of Leptospirosis infec-
tion, the water stagnation in the surrounding area or the high 
rodent population in the area can contribute to the spread of 
the disease (Van de Maele et al., 2008). The fourth element, 
breeding stock, selection of the breeding stock is as impor -
tant as the other three elements. Good breeding stock can 
aid in raising a healthier future population. Certain breed -
ing lines can give rise to immunocompromised individuals 
or can be prone to certain genetic impediments which may 
lead to disease-susceptible individuals. Irrespective of the 
type of population all four elements remain as a marker for 
infection control programs.
There are several ways how an infection can spread 
from one host to the other. The two main modes of trans -
mission are horizontal transmission and vertical transmis -
sion (Fig. 3).
3.3.1 Horizontal transmission
It is the transmission of disease from one segment of the 
population to the other. Popular examples of such transmis-
sion are influenza virus infections among dogs from one 
shelter to the other. Horizontal transmission can be further 
divided into direct and indirect forms.
The transmission of an infection from an infected host 
to a susceptible host through a direct contact or through the 
discharges from the infected host is called as direct form. 
Transmission of canine distemper from urine and discharges 
to an unvaccinated host is an example for direct form.
Indirect transmission is the transmission which involves 
a living, inanimate or intermediate vehicle between the host 
and susceptible organisms. The intermediate vehicle is of -
ten called as a vector (living carrier), e.g., insects. The dura-
tion and the course of a disease varies from one disease to 
the other. When there is more than one vector involved in a 
disease, the life cycle of the disease becomes complex. In an 
infection where biological vectors aid in the transmission of 
an infection they are named as vector-borne infection.
3.3.2 Vertical transmission
Infections which are spread from one generation to the other 
when in utero or when in in ovo are referred to as vertically 
transmitted diseases. Transmission through milk is also con-
sidered as vertical transmission (Davison et al., 1999).
 (1) Hereditary-transmitted diseases : They are carried 
within the genome of either parent. In infections 
caused by retrovirus, integrated DNA copies in the 
host’s genome are transferred hereditarily.
 (2) Congenitally transmitted diseases : Refers to the dis -
eases commonly acquired either in utero or in ovo.
The infection can spread from a generation to another if 
the mother/dam has a pre-existing condition or if the dam 
acquires an infection during gestation period. Further nu -
tritional deficiency can contribute to the risks of perinatal 
infections. Transmission of the diseases can follow at any 
stages of embryonic development, which can result in abor-
tion, still births, teratoma, or innate infections postdelivery.
Germinative transmission
It refers to infections pertaining to the superficial layers of 
the ovary or diseases of the ovum.
Transplacental transmission
Transmission to the embryo can happen transplacentally 
or through fetal circulation. For example, kittens can get 
infected with feline panleukopenia virus transplacentally, 
as the virus is small and can cross the placenta in early 
pregnancy.
Ascending infection
When there is an uphill infection from lower genital area 
to the amnion and placenta, it is commonly considered as 
ascending infection. Example: staphylococcus and strepto -
coccus infection.
FIG. 3 Modes of transmission.

Prevention and control of infectious diseases  Chapter | 41  601
Infections during parturition are often reported due the 
transmission of pathogens from lower genitals to the fetus 
at birth. Example herpes virus infections. The exposure 
of new pathogens to fetus can be detrimental as it can af -
fect their immunological status of the fetus. Hence, leads 
to the risk of misinterpretation of the non-self-antigen as 
self-antigens.
Transovarian and trans-stadial transmission
Certain arthropods like mites, ticks, transmit viruses, bac -
teria, and protozoa from one generation to another through 
their eggs such transmissions are called as transovarian 
transmission, e.g., canine babesiosis causes severe anemia 
in dogs it is transmitted by Dermacentor and Hemaphysalis 
ticks. Some arthropods transmit these infectious organisms 
from one generation to another through stadial transmis -
sion, i.e., from one stage of the development to another. On 
the contrary, some are capable of transovarian, trans-stadial 
and sexual transmission, e.g., African swine fever virus is 
primarily maintained in the tick Ornithodoros moubata by 
these three methods of transmission.
3.4 Methods of transmission
Ways in which the infectious agent comes in contact with 
the sites in the host can be listed as (Fig. 4).
3.4.1 Contact
Transmission by contact is the transfer of the infectious or-
ganism to the host without the involvement of the external 
factors. This method of transmission focuses on the patho -
gens that are shed from surface of the body and gain entry 
through the body surface. Most of the agents needs some de-
gree of trauma to complete the transmission process, e.g., a 
bite injury is required for lyssa virus to gain entry to the sur-
face of the host’s body. It is challenging for infectious agents 
to cross the skin surface, when the skin barrier is resilient.
In case of spirochetes—Leptospira they require soft and 
water sunken skin to penetrate, even in the absence of an 
injury. They pierce the intact skin through screwing motion 
and gain their entry.
3.4.2 Ingestion
Ingestion is a method of transmission where an infectious 
agent gain entry to the host with the help of a mechanical 
agent, e.g., contaminated feed, water, mechanical vectors, 
etc., depending upon the type and predilection site of the 
pathogens the route of infection differs. When the predilec-
tion site is intestines, organisms are excreted through feces. 
On invasion of blood, the exit can be through urine, e.g., 
Salmonella (Hatta and Smits, 2007 ). In cases of excretion 
through breath—reovirus.
3.4.3 Inoculation
An introduction of a pathogen by puncture or through a 
wound is called transmission by inoculation. It is also a 
form of contact transmission. Example arthropods inoculate 
the pathogenic organism through their bite—canine filaria-
sis is spread through the bite of the mosquitos ( Abd Rani 
et al., 2010).
3.4.4 Aerial transmission
Airborne transmission of infectious agents, frequently over 
long distances, is often defined as indirect, although it is 
more correctly classified as direct because no intermediate 
vehicle is involved. Aerial transmission is the transmission 
of infectious agent through contaminated air. Plethora of in-
fections are transmitted aerially. Infectious organisms like 
bacteria, virus, and fungi are spread through contaminated 
air causing widespread of the diseases. The expired air from 
the infected animal gets transferred to the susceptible ani -
mal through inhalation. Aerosol transmission is the trans -
mission by droplets of the size less than 5  μm. This may 
be a residue of the evaporated dry particle called nuclei. 
Respiratory droplets are relatively heavier; therefore, they 
fall down after emission, but the smaller droplets contain 
live infectious agent and can persist in contaminated air for 
longer period. Larger droplets of size 100  μm settle within 
2 m, whereas smaller droplets of size 5–20  μm containing 
infectious agent linger in the environment for extended 
period and area ( Jones and Brosseau, 2015 ; Gralton et al., 
2011). The airborne infections are highly influenced by en-
vironment factors such as relative humidity and tempera -
ture. Other factors that influence the aerial transmission are 
pH of the air, wind speed, extend of air pollution and salin-
ity (Sooryanarain and Elankumaran, 2015).
3.4.5 Coitus
Infections that are spread from one animal to the other 
through sexual contact is called as venereal diseases or 
FIG. 4 Methods of transmission.

602 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
transmission of disease by coitus. These pathogens of -
ten have predilection on the genital area which causes the 
excretion of the organisms during sexual contact. Canine 
brucellosis is an example for sexually transmitted diseases. 
Large number of bacteria are shed via vaginal secretions 
and semen. The main clinical sign of the infection is in -
fertility in either sex or abortion in late gestational period. 
The aborted dam will continue excreting the bacteria for 
4–5 weeks post-abortion (Santos et al., 2021). Canine trans-
missible venereal tumor is another infection that has vene -
real transmission among dogs. They form febrile, ulcerating 
type tumor growths in the genital area which can be spread 
via mating, biting, licking, and sniffing of the tumor site.
3.4.6 Iatrogenic transmission
Iatrogenic transmission is the transmission of the infectious 
disease in a hospital or clinic set-up, during a medical pro -
cedure like blood transfusions, nonaseptic surgical proce -
dures or reuse of needles or intravenous catheters.
3.5 Environment
During transmission cycle, infectious pathogen can be at 
various stages. Stages involving different environments 
both inside and outside the host and other vectors involved. 
These environments can be broadly divided into: environ -
ment within the host and external environment.
3.5.1 Environment within the host
Host has various defense mechanisms like humoral antibod-
ies, special reactive cells, phagocytes and other chemical 
which discourage the invasion of the pathogens inside the 
body. The mechanisms make the internal environment hos-
tile. In contrast, the parasites/pathogens evolved to break 
the defense strategies of the host and to compete with the 
other agents. These involve resistant cuticles to resist the 
hydrochloric acid in the stomach, an intracellular stage of 
development, encystment, immunosuppression, and re -
duced immunogenicity ( Capron and Capron, 1992 ). Some 
possess capsules that protect them against phagocytosis, for 
example, Pneumococcus spp. Many of the parasites have 
impressive fecundity in order to ensure greater survivability 
against the lethal conditions inside the host.
3.5.2 External environment
External environment is presented with numerous threats, 
viz. low temperatures, ultraviolet rays, desiccation, etc. 
Desiccation and low temperatures are not lethal, these fluc-
tuations make it rather challenging to multiply. Many agents 
partially protect themselves from desiccation by being dis -
charged feces and urine. They are also shed into advanta -
geous surroundings to withstand uncertainties. Leptospires 
persist longer in paddy fields and are found to thrive  better 
in monsoon season ( Goldstein, 2010). Some organism hi -
bernates to survive for longer period; they form spores and 
cyst that are resilient to external conditions. Viruses like 
poxviruses are resistant to desiccation and can survive for 
long periods in dry infected scab material. Certain agents 
may also survive in inanimate material in the environment, 
which may therefore act as a vehicle; example, food con -
taminated with Salmonella spp.
3.6 Maintenance of disease
There are numerous strategies to maintain or preserve the 
cycle of transmission and create conducive conditions 
to continue the infection course. The five strategies are 
(Fig. 5):
3.6.1 Dodging of external environment
Certain agents dodge the stage in the external environment 
by choosing vertical, venereal, and vector  transmission. 
FIG. 5 Strategies for the maintenance of diseases.

Prevention and control of infectious diseases  Chapter | 41  603
Therefore, they avoid the risk of surviving in harsh 
environment.
3.6.2 Resistant forms
Another strategy to survive in the harsh environment is to 
form conducive environment around the organism like a 
shell or a resistant structure. They serve as a strong pro -
tection from heat and desiccation. Bacillus and clostridium 
bacteria form spore which are resistant against high boiling 
temperatures and severe desiccation (Wiencek et al., 1990). 
Fungi also produce spores, but they are relatively less re -
sistant than bacterial spores. Parasites form cysts to remain 
viable for months to years, until a favorable environment for 
multiplication is obtained.
3.6.3 Rapidly in and rapidly out
In this strategy, the infectious agent enters and exits the host 
rapidly which leaves lesser amount of time for an immuno-
logical response. This strategy is commonly found when the 
number of susceptible hosts are higher and housed in closed 
proximity. For example, in case of respiratory infections the 
agent spreads rapid from one host to the other within a span 
of 24 h. In such infections, morbidity rate will be high.
3.6.4 Persistence within the host
Some infectious agents can survive within the host for life 
time. This is attributable to the immune status of the host. 
When agents get accustomed to the host immune system, 
they adapt themselves to live within the host and rely on 
the host for survival. These conditions may lead to latency 
or immunosuppression and tolerance. Latency/immunosup-
pression are when the agent persists inside and the host, do 
not elicit any clinical symptoms, provided the immune sys-
tem is strong and active. The agents are maintained within 
the host for years or life time with general or agent-specific 
immunosuppression.
3.6.5 Expansion of host range
For better survival and maintenance, agents infect wide 
range of hosts. About 50% of the pathogenic infections 
have humans and animals as hosts. They can survive and 
multiply their number in all these hosts. Therefore, they are 
likely to be over-presented as emerging and re-emerging in-
fections with varying antigenicity.
3.7 The classical triad: Agent-host-environment 
relationship
The complex interaction of agents (bacteria, viruses, pro -
tozoans, parasites, fungi, and prions), host (animals), and 
environmental factors give rise to the outcome of infectious 
disease (Fig. 6). The factors governing the environment of-
fer a suitable ground for the agent and host to interact. The 
succeeding agent-host interactions determine the outcome 
of exposure. These interactions undergo a cascade of stages 
such as infection, recovery, or death. This relationship is 
also known as the epidemiological triad. The above concept 
forms the foundation of epidemiology and the cornerstone 
of infectious diseases.
Subsequently, after the exposure to the agent, there are 
two stages: colonization and infection. Colonization refers 
to the entry of a pathogen and multiplication of the pathogen 
at the site of entry, it could be through the respiratory tract, 
digestive tract, etc. Colonization does not necessarily mean 
disease causation, for that, pathogens have to invade and 
cause disruption in the host tissues to a level where normal 
functions are disturbed. Thus, resulting in the demonstration 
of clinical symptoms, in turn, causing the infection/disease. 
The exposure of the pathogen to a susceptible host resulting 
FIG. 6 The classical triad.

604 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
in a disease’s outcome is also influenced by the agent’s in -
fectivity, virulence, and pathogenicity. Simultaneously, the 
vulnerability of the host to disease is also important (Li and 
Baker, 2012).
Latent infections too play a significant role from a pub-
lic health point of view. For instance, if the immunity of the 
host is resilient, it leads to the elimination of the pathogen 
otherwise, leads to incomplete elimination. In such cases, 
the pathogen becomes dormant and it is called latent infec-
tion. On exposure to a suitable environment, these infec -
tions can recur and cause a full-fledged disease.
3.8 Immunoprohylaxis
Immunity is an active process of recognition and destruction 
of self from non-self-particles that enters the body. Foreign 
or non-self-particles refers to the infectious organisms or 
cancer cells or graft tissues. Immunity can be basically 
divided into two innate immunity and passive immunity. 
Innate immunity indicates the defense mechanism of the 
body that are inherited by birth. On the other hand, pas -
sive immunity is the defense mechanism that are acquired 
after an exposure to specific antigen or an infectious agent. 
It is called as adaptive immunity as it is acquired during 
the life time in response to adaptation. Passive immunity is 
portioned into humoral immunity and cell-mediated immu-
nity. In humoral immunity, non-self-particles are destroyed 
using antibodies; however in cell-mediated immunity, cell 
phagocytosis is used as weapon to destroy or dispose-off the 
foreign materials (Carroll and Isenman, 2012).
Immunoprophylaxis refers to the prevention of infec -
tious diseases by the process of immunization. On stimu -
lation of the body either by actual disease exposure or by 
vaccine, body prepares to defend on subsequent exposure to 
those specific antigens. The immune response can be trig -
gered either by the presence of the whole agent or a met -
abolic product of the agent. Immunity can be transferred 
passively by administration of components of the humoral 
or cell-mediated that are procured from the sensitized do -
nor. This can be beneficial for therapeutic purposes in an 
initial stage of an infection.
3.8.1 Maternally derived antibodies
Canines and felines have endotheliochorial type of placenta. 
When a dam is exposed to an infection or an immunization 
protocol, her body produces antibodies in response to that 
specific antigen. Such antibodies are readily circulated in 
the body mixing with the fetus’s blood. Only 2%–18% of 
the antibodies produced in the body of a dam can cross pla-
centa and reach the fetus. Majority of the immunoglobulins 
are received through colostrum. The antibodies attained in 
the circulation of new-born pups and kittens’ aids in the 
survival during post-delivery especially when they are co -
lostrum deprived. The immunoglobulins in milk are at its 
highest concentration immediately after delivery and per -
sists in low concentration throughout the nursing period. 
IgG and IgM play a pivotal role in a new-born’s immune 
mechanism. During initial days of nursing, these immu -
noglobulins are absorbed in the duodenum and jejunum 
through membrane receptors situated on the intestinal epi -
thelium. There is maximum absorption in first 24 h of birth 
and gradually declines ( Figs. 7 and 8 ). Secretory IgA also 
plays an important role in defense mechanism, protecting 
from upper respiratory and enteric infections (Decaro et al., 
2005). Their mechanism of action is inhibition of adher -
ence of pathogens at the mucosal surface and simultaneous 
neutralization. As the maternally derived antibodies decline 
in the circulation the young ones start to become suscep -
tible infections. They begin to start synthesizing their own 
antibodies to combat the infectious diseases. The produc -
tion of antibodies is stimulated by the level of circulating 
maternally derived antibodies. When the level of MDA 
falls below the threshold level, it triggers the production of 
FIG. 7 A day-old Rottweiler pups nursing. (Sara’s Birds & Exotic Animal Hospital.)

Prevention and control of infectious diseases  Chapter | 41  605
 antibodies. There are no absolute numbers for the threshold 
limit; however, the ratio between the decline of MDA and 
dose of the pathogenic/vaccine antigen is considered.
3.8.2 Active immunization
Vaccination kindles active immunity by administration of 
the antigenic extracts and whole cultures of infectious or -
ganisms to the host. Immunization refers to the successful 
induction of immune response. Not all vaccinations end in 
successful immunization as the level of MDA is different in 
different animals. Clinical vaccination of pet animals ma -
jorly concentrates on the infectious diseases that are com -
monly found in that geographical area and are limited to 
disease caused by viruses, bacteria, and protozoans.
Conventional whole organism vaccines are of two 
types live attenuated or modified live and inactivated or 
killed vaccine. In order to remove the unwanted aller -
gic reaction to the proteins and to increase the potency, 
newer types of vaccines are developed. The usage of live 
agents is being modified by genetic deletion. Newer non -
infectious vaccines are making use of subunit fractions of 
purified agents or synthetic peptides molded by genetic 
recombination.
Live whole organism in vaccine has the ability to stimu-
late both cell-mediated immunity and sustained humoral im-
munity in comparison with the inactivated or purified ones. 
The components in the vaccines must be modified or attenu-
ated in order to retain the immunogenicity and replication in 
the concerned host without producing the infection.
Attenuation of agents is established by adapting them to 
unusual hosts, by subjecting them to extended storage, or by 
serial passage in tissue culture. Intentional genetic manipu-
lations are other ways for attenuation (Minor, 2015).
Inactivated whole vaccine components are subjected 
to several forms of denaturation without terminating the 
 immunogenicity. Treatments with heat and light, chemical 
treatments are established for the inactivation process, but 
these are considered to relatively ineffective as it can cause 
reactions in the injection site. On addition of adjuvants and 
inactivating compounds, host becomes vulnerable for local 
and allergic reactions. On the contrary, noninfectious vac -
cines are preferred as they lack the risk of producing the 
disease. Nevertheless, these vaccines do not imitate natural 
infection and therefore may not generate adequate mucosal 
immunity (Basta et al., 2008). In comparison with the modi-
fied live vaccine, inactivated vaccine has short duration of 
response. It might take 2–3  weeks for the full protection 
nonetheless the protection produced is sufficient for routine 
uses. If the animals are partially protected, there is a risk 
of mild or subclinical infections if they are exposed to the 
specific agents.
4 Disease control and prevention 
strategies
Control of a disease refers to the general reduction of mor -
bidity and mortality in a population due to a specific dis -
ease. Eradication of a disease refers to the extinction of an 
infectious agent from a particular geographical area. Main 
strategies are doing nothing, quarantine, euthanasia, vacci -
nation, and therapeutic chemotherapy (Fig. 9).
4.1 Doing nothing
It is not exactly a control mechanism, but in this strategy, 
intervention is not recommended. The disease is allowed 
to take its natural course, which means that incidence of 
an infectious disease may get reduced by natural changes 
in the host-environment-parasite relationships without 
intervention.
FIG. 8 A day-old Persian kittens nursing. (Vetbug clinic.)

606 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
4.2 Quarantine
Quarantine is a very valuable strategy that still holds strong 
in case of any outbreak of a disease. It is the isolation of the 
an individual or a group of animals that are either infected 
or suspected of an infection (Figs. 10 and 11). Basic idea is 
to separate the infected animals from susceptible animals. 
There are rules governing the import of animals like dogs, 
cats, and zoo animals from other countries ( Wang et  al., 
2010). In such movements of animals, quarantine is an abso-
lute necessity to avoid transboundary transmission of infec-
tious diseases. They need to be quarantine for about 6 weeks 
and health certificate should be issued. The period of quar -
antine depends upon the incubation period of the agent, time 
taken for an infected animal to become infectious.
4.3 Euthanasia
Dogs or cats infected with untreatable zoonotic diseases 
can be considered for mercy killing or euthanasia. Another 
strategy is test and removal. An animal is tested for a par -
ticular disease and removed if it is positive for the test in 
question. Normally pet animals are not euthanized on regu-
lar basis. They are euthanized only when the quality of their 
life is compromised and for zoonotic reasons. In developing 
countries, rabies is one of the strong reasons to euthanize 
dogs as it is untreatable and zoonotic. Canines and felines 
have the capability to transmit the disease to wide-range of 
hosts. In such conditions, euthanasia is crucial to block the 
spread (Underwood et al., 2013).
4.4 Vaccination
It is an integral part of any control programs. All pet and 
domesticated animals should be vaccinated against all en -
demic disease existing in that geographical area. There are 
core and noncore vaccines that should be mandatorily fol -
lowed routinely. Vaccinations can be taken on strategic or 
emergency basis. Strategic vaccinations are carried out to 
prevent incursion of the disease from endemic areas and to 
limit the spread of the disease in endemic area. Vaccination 
can be performed both within and around a region where 
an outbreak occurs; this strategy is called dampening-down 
vaccination. Dogs are generally vaccinated for canine parvo-
virus, distemper, canine hepatitis, and rabies (core vaccines) 
(Figs. 12 and 13). Noncore vaccines include Bordetella bron-
chiseptica, Borrelia burgdorferi, and Leptospira depending 
upon the exposure risk. Cats are generally vaccinated for 
Panleukopenia (feline distemper), feline calcivirus, feline 
herpesvirus type I (feline rhinotracheitis), and rabies (core 
vaccines) (Fig. 14). Noncore includes feline leukemia virus, 
FIG. 9 Disease control and prevention strategies.
FIG. 10 Dog in quarantine. (Thrissur Pet Clinic, Kerala, India.)

Prevention and control of infectious diseases  Chapter | 41  607
Bordetella, Chlamydophila felis , and feline immunodefi -
ciency virus (Larson and Schultz, 2021).
4.5 Therapeutic chemotherapy
When in sporadic outbreaks of infections, therapeutic man-
agement of diseases takes an upper hand in controlling 
the diseases. For instance, in case of sporadic out breaks 
of parvo viral infections, quarantine in combination with 
therapeutic approach stands to hold the ground. Dogs are 
provided with antimicrobials to combat the secondary bac -
terial infection together with intravenous fluids and platelet 
supplements, etc. In case of Leptospira infections, antibiot-
ics like tetracyclines along with intravenous fluids and di -
alysis are needed.
An infection control program is necessary regardless of 
the nature and number of the population in question. It is 
FIG. 11 Cats in quarantine. (Vetbug Clinic, Kerala, India.)
FIG. 12 Inactivated rabies vaccine. (Photo Dr. Ashish Cristopher.)
FIG. 13 Multicomponent vaccine of dogs. (Photo: Dr. Ashish Cristopher.)

608 SECTION | C  Infectious diseases of dogs and cats
a time-consuming as well as an expensive task to develop 
such control strategies. It requires a great number of the 
workforce to curate policies and regulations with regard to 
the prevention and outbreak programs. Veterinary practitio-
ners play the role of a frontier in risk assessment and iden -
tification of emerging and re-emerging infectious diseases 
and their prevention measures (Gibbs and Gibbs, 2012). The 
risk of zoonotic infections is high among households these 
days as animals share an unbreakable relationship with hu -
mans. The risk of the spread of fungal infections is high 
from dogs and cats to pet owners. Therefore, there is more 
need for awareness, training, and vaccination programs to 
protect the welfare of humans and animals.
According to the classical model of Leavell and Clark 
(1965), the prevention strategies can be categorized into pri-
mary, secondary, and tertiary.
4.5.1 Primary
Based on the classic model of Leavell and Clark (1965), in-
fectious disease prevention activities can be categorized as 
primary, secondary, or tertiary. Primary prevention occurs 
at the predisease phase and aims to protect populations, so 
that infection and disease never occur. For example, measles 
immunization campaigns aim to decrease  susceptibility 
 following exposure. The goal of secondary prevention is to 
halt the progress of an infection during its early, often asymp-
tomatic stages so as to prevent disease development or limit 
its severity; steps are important for not only improving the 
prognosis of individual cases but also preventing infectious 
agent transmission. For example, interventions for secondary 
prevention of hepatitis C in injection drug user populations 
include early diagnosis and treatment by active surveillance 
and screening (Miller and Dillon, 2015). Tertiary prevention 
focuses on diseased individuals with the objective of limit -
ing impact through, for example, interventions that decrease 
disease progression, increase functionality, and maximize 
quality of life. Broadly, public health efforts to control infec-
tious diseases focus on primary and secondary prevention ac-
tivities that reduce the potential for exposure to an infectious 
agent and increase host resistance to infection.
A unique characteristic of many infectious diseases is 
that exposure to certain infectious agents can have conse -
quences for other individuals because an infected person 
can act as a source of exposure. Some pathogens (e.g., STI 
agents) are directly transmitted to other people, while oth -
ers (vector-borne disease (VBD) agents) are transmitted 
indirectly.
5 Conclusion
Infectious diseases are preventable with awareness, under -
standing the transmission process, comprehension on incu-
bation period, agent viability, immunization, prophylactic 
chemotherapy, surveillance, and monitoring. The relation -
ship between the agent-host-environment plays a critical 
role in controlling a disease progression; while charting the 
standard operating procedure to control or prevent a disease, 
the key step is to gain complete knowledge and information 
about the disease. When a disease is partially controlled, 
there is always a risk of re-emergence. Evolutionary changes 
in their genetic constitution attribute to their re-emerging 
characteristics. When an agent evolves after mutation, their 
key features get modified, which makes them unpredictable 
and perilous to control. Therefore, caution should be taken 
in formulating a strategy that is appropriate for a disease. 
After achieving the control over transmission and morbid -
ity, it is mandatory to opt for a complete surveillance in 
regular intervals.
